# 1.1 Maru (550 A.D.)
* #district/chamba
# 1 Rajas of Chamba
Chamba is the land of Gods also known as ‘Shiva – Bhumi’, because of the abode of Lord Shiva on Manimahesh Kailash at Bharmaur. Chamba district of Himachal Pradesh is a dreamland situated in the lap of majestic western Himalaya. It is culturally rich and inhabited by colourful people.

In this chapter a brief political history of the region beginning from the formation of the princely state of Chamba to the Chamba district has been mentioned along with its sociocultural background.

The name of this State is found in the Bansauli (Vansavali). Bansauli is the genealogical roll of the Rajas of Chamba. Since the State was surrounded by its snow-clad mountain barriers, it escaped the destruction of its monuments of old civilization at the hands of the foreign invaders.
* All the Rajas of Chamba belongs to the same dynasty.
* They ruled over Chamba since 550 A.D. to 1948 A.D. with the gap of few years.

## 1.23 S.No	Name of The Rajas	Ruling Period	Special Achievements
1.	Maru	550 A.D.	Founder of Bharmaur
2.	Aditya Varman	620 A.D.	Used the suffix (Surname) of Varman.
3.	Sahil Varman	920 A.D	Founder of Chamba, made it as his capital.
4.	Raj Varman	1192 A.D.	Contemporary of Qutub-uddin Aibak.
5.	Anand Varman	1475 A.D.	He was a Tantrik.
6.	Partap Singh Varman	1559 A.D.	Last King with the surname of Varman

## 1.1 Maru (550 A.D.)
Chamba is one of the oldest principalities of the western Himalayas.
The state of Chamba was founded as early as 550A.D. with Brahampura as its capital Raja Maru is said to have been the founder of the ruling family of Chamba as stated in the state chronicle.
The Rajas of Chamba belong to the Suryavanshi line of Rajputs and their Bansawali begins from Vishnu or Narayana.
Maru whose original home is believed to have been Ayodhya, migrated at a very early period to the upper Ganges valley, along with his family and he settled in Kalapa.
Brahampura (present Brahmaur) village was founded by him and he made it the capital of his state around the middle of 6th century A.D.
He is stated to have penetrated into the upper valley through the outer hills and is said
to have conquered the territory from the local petty chiefs. At this place Brahampura which is
considered to be the present Brahmaur village was founded by him and made capital of the
State.
He started his reign in 550 A.D.
It is also stated that the original State was very small in size and was confined in the valley of the Ravi from below Bara Banghal with its tributaries the Budhil and the Tundahen as far down as Chhatrari.
The Marus rule was only nominal and it is said that after having founded the State he
handed it over to his son Jaistambh and himself retired by detaching from the worldly affairs.
Jaistambh was succeeded by Mahastambh.