# 1.19 Sham Singh
* 1873 A.D.
* He was born on 8th July 1866.
* This young Raja was installed by General Reynell Taylor the Commissioner of Amritsar on the 7th October, 1873.
* Mian Avtar Singh was appointed as his Wazir.
* Settlement operations of land were carried out. Col. Blair Reid retired in March, 1877 and was succeeded by Mr. R.T. Burney under whose administration the communication system was further improved.
* Chamba-Brahmaur, Chamba-Chuari Khas and Chamba-Khajiar roads were built.
* Mr. R.T. Burnney was succeeded by Capt. C.H.T. Marshall who geared up the developmental works in the state.
* Sham Singh Hospital was expanded with facilities for treating in-patients with 40 beds.
* The hospital was also fully outfitted with all essential medical and surgical appliances.
* In 1881 a dispensary was opened at Tissa.
* Leper asylum started by the “Mission to Lepers” in 1876 was taken over by the state in 1881.
* The palace was renovated and a number of new houses were built.
* Sheetla Bridge over the Ravi damaged by the floods in 1894 was replaced by a suspension bridge of iron at the cost of nearly a lakh of rupees.
* A network of Post offices in the interior of the state was started.
* The judicial department adapted to local conditions was reorganized on the British pattern.
* Police force was increased to maintain law and order.
* Buildings and roads were maintained by the Public Works Department.
* Education was fostered by opening new schools and promising pupils were offered scholarships for study within and outside the state.
* A small military force consisting of 300 infantry and 30 cavalry with 4 guns was formed and barracks were erected in the neighbourhood of the town.
* The state was also visited by Sir Mackworth Young, Lt. Governor of Punjab in 1901 and by Lady and Viceroy Curzon in 1900.
* Because of his prolonged illness Sham Singh abdicated in favour of his brother Mian Bhuri Singh in 1904.