%% Zoottelkeeper: Beginning of the autogenerated index file list  %%
-  [[01 History of Himachal Pradesh/Z Districtwise History of Himachal Pradesh/06 History of Kullu/Kullu Economy/Handicrafts of Kullu/Himachali Cap|Himachali Cap]]
%% Zoottelkeeper: End of the autogenerated index file list  %%
# Handicrafts of Kullu
* In the series of weaving, Kullu shawls are famous among the handicrafts of the district.
* Plain shawls of Pashmina locally known as ‘Loi’ are woven by all households.
* Shawls are of two kinds, one is plain and other is of variety of designs. The shawls are woven from homespun yarn as well as from the imported yarn called “Ruffle”. The designed shawls known as “Phulwali” are of recent origin.
* Another allied craft is the weaving of Pattoos and tweed cloth (Patti). ‘Patti’ is used for making coats, long coats (Cholas) and caps etc.
* Kullu caps are made of coloured woollen cloth with a velvety circular band of shaneel etc. around it.
* ‘Pullans’, footwear like the bedroom slippers made of fibres and wool are other products of handicrafts of upper riches of inner and outer Seraj ‘Pattoos’ are also made of local wool.
* These are thicker and heavier than shawls.
* Ordinary thick and soft one is called “Dohru” are mostly used as bed blankets.
* The “Pattoos” woven of fine wool with coloured strips are used by women folk as a dress in the rural areas.
* Bhutti Weavers Cooperative Society
* Before country’s independence, a group of 12 progressive handloom weavers joined hands and organized and got registered a Handloom Weavers Cooperative on 18-12-1944 in one of the remote backward Lug Valley of Kullu. The working of the Society remained dormant upto the year 1955. However in the year 1956 one local youth namely Mr. VED RAM THAKUR was motivated to [[join]] this cooperative. With a brilliant record in weaving, marketing and management, he transformed this dormant society into a very active institution. He brought in dramatic changes and maintained its unique position as a market leader in shawl industry. He also donated his own shawl weaving industry to this society which is a rare example. He passed away at the age of 50 years in the year 1971. The reins of this society was taken over by his brilliant son Shri Satya Parkash Thakur. Shri Satya parkash Thakur with his able leadership, systematic planning made this society a very successful profit making venture. This society is providing employment to over 1000 weavers families. This society has made economic development amongst the handloom Weaver Members.
