# 1.1 Kangra School of Paintings
* This Pahari styles of painting developed in the Sub-Himalayan states that were also under the umbrella of Mughal overlordship. There were many schools that were flourishing in smaller kingdoms, which came under the blanket of ‘Pahari Paintings’. These consisted ateliers in the court of around 22 princely states stretching from Jammu to Almora. Hence, the Pahari paintings can be grouped into two groups:
    - Jammu or Dogra School: Northern Series
    - Kangra School: Southern Series
* The themes that were painted ranged from mythology to literature and brought new techniques to the fore. A typical Pahari painting would bring several figures into the canvas and they would all be full of movement. Each figure is different in composition, colour, and pigmentation. Two of the greatest figures of this school are Nainsukh and Manaku.
## 1.1 Kangra School of Paintings
After the decline of the Mughal Empire, many artists trained in the Mughal style migrated to the Kangra region as they got patronage by Raja Goverdhan Singh in 1774. It led to the birth of Guler Kangra School of paintings. It first evolved in Guler then came to Kangra. This school reached its zenith under the patronage of Raja Sansar Chand at Sujanpur Tira. His paintings were marked with a sensuality and intelligence that the other schools lack.
The most popular subjects were the Gita Govinda, Bhagwata Purana, Baramasa, Satsai of Biharilal, Rasikpriya of Keshvadas and Nal Damyanti. All the paintings had an other worldly feel about them. Another very famous group of paintings is the “Twelve months” where the artist tried to bring forth the effect of the twelve months on the emotions of human beings. This emotive style was popular of the 19th century. The Kangra School became the parent school to the other ateliers which developed in the court of Kullu, Chamba, and Mandi.