%% Zoottelkeeper: Beginning of the autogenerated index file list  %%
-  [[01 History of Himachal Pradesh/4 Modern History of Himachal Pradesh/01 Hill States and their relations with the Sikhs/01 Hill States and their relations with the Sikhs|01 Hill States and their relations with the Sikhs]]
-  [[01 History of Himachal Pradesh/4 Modern History of Himachal Pradesh/National Struggle in Himachal Pradesh/National Struggle in Himachal Pradesh|National Struggle in Himachal Pradesh]]
%% Zoottelkeeper: End of the autogenerated index file list  %%
# 4 Modern History of Himachal Pradesh


## 1 

0 A4.2 GORKHA INVASION-ITS NATURE & CONSEQUENCES, TREATY OF SUGAULI)
[HPAS (Main) GS Paper-I, Unit-I, Sub Unit-ill]
· Q. 23.How did the entire stream of history of Shimla and Punjab's principals change as a result of the invitation
given by King Mahanchand of Kahlur to invade Gorkhas?
[HPAS (Main) GS Paper-1, Dated=28-11-2017] (8 Marks, 120 Words)
HINT-
♦ End of Sovereign's Dominance
♦ Capture the hill principals of Gorkhas.
♦ Invite Sikhs by Sansar Chand for ending Gorkha's influence in which Sikhs' domination was established
on the Punjabi hill states.
♦ The English-Gorkha war took place on the Shimla hill principals and the English empire expansions were
exposed in Shimla and the hill states of Punjab.
♦ The British helped many villages from Gorkhas and developed cities like Shimla, Mussoorie, Kasauli.
(i) Gorkha Invasion : The main purpose of the attack was to expand the area. Cork.ha soldiers won the land as a
reward. During the Gorkha invasion many forts were constructed.
(1) Invitation to the Go.rkhas : Rana Bahadur Shah King of Nepal sent anny under the leadership of Amar
Singh Thapa in Kumaon at the invitation of Harkdev Joshi and captured Almora. In 1804 AD, Amar Singh
Thapa captured Garhwal. King Mahanchand of Kahlur called Amar Singh Thapa for his help against Sansar
Chand and Raja of Hindur (Ramsharan Singh). Raja Karamprakash of Sirmaur called Amar Singh Thapa
for help against Hindur and his brother Kanwar Ratan Singh. Amar Singh Thapa kills Ratan Singh. Ranajor
Singh, son of Amar Singh Thapa, defeated Karamprakash and occupied the princely. state of Sirmaur.
Karamprakash took refuge in Bhuria, Ambala. · .
. (2) The authority of the Gorkha on the hill states : After capturing the kingdom of Sirmaur, the Gorkhas
defeated the Hindur army in Azimgarh. King Ramsharan Singh ran towards Kalsi in the south. Amar
Singh Thapa got l:findur, Pundar, Jubbal and Dharni in 1810 AD: Gorakhs defeated Sansar Chand iI1 the
year 1806 in Mahahriorio and forced them to hide in Kangra Fort. Amar Singh Thapa freed King Ishwari
Sen of Mandi from Nadun Jail after 12 years from the imprisonment of Sansar Chand. Amar Singh Thapa
established his headquarters in .Baghal Arki King of Arki, Jagat Singh.went to the forest. In May 1811,
Amarsingh Thapa defeated Bilshahr·and t ook control over Theog,·Balsan;. Kotgax:h;-}ubbal and Rampur.
Raja Ugarsingh of Bushahr died suddenly. Bushahr's minor King Mohinder Singh lived with his mother
in his old capital Kamru. Amar' Singh Thapa took over the kingdoms and thakusaiyo around Rampur in
1812 AD. Amar Singh Thapa handed over the land to the minor king of Bushahr instead of an annual tax of
12,000 rupees and returned to Arki himself.
(ii) Gorkha-Bi;itish War (1814 -15 AD)
(1) Gorkha due to British conflict
• The boundary between the British and Nepal was vague and uncertain, in which the struggle between
the two powers was compulsory. . .
• The Gorkhas captured 6 villages of Hindur and Maharaja Patiala, whose Ochterlony opposed them.
• The Gorkhas took control of all the major passes and roads going to Tibet, in which the British Tibeti
trade (musk, borax, wool) began to be affected. Gorkhas also took the route to Ladak.'1, which required
Gorkha-British war.
• The British were worried by the capture of the Shimla hill principals of Gorakhas.
• The Gorakhas took control of English protection Batwal and Shehroz, from which Lord Hastings
started work on the strategy to deal with Gorkhas in 1813.
History of Hlmaehal Pradesh 23
(2) The Gorkha-British War : November 1, 1814, the British started a war against the Gorkhas in which the ill
kings supported the British. Four troops of English were made-Gil lespie, Martindale, Will iam Fra er and
Ochterlony led these troops.
• Gillespie and Balbhadra Thapa : Major General Rollo Gillespie marched towards Dehradun and
Kyarda Doon with 4400 soldiers. Dehradun's commander Balabhadra Thapa left Dehradun and
barricaded Kalinga. The British won the fort of Kalinga. Gillespie was badly injured in this campaign.
• Martindale and Ranajor Singh : Ranajor Singh left Nahan to face the Bri tish and barricaded the Jaitak
fort. The British forces reached Nahan on 19 December 1914 and besieged Ranajor Singh in the Jaitak
Fort on 25 December. Ranajor Singh defeated Martindale badly here.
• James Baillie Fraser (Occupance on Jubbal, Chaupal, Rawingarh, Rampur and Kotgarh) : James
Baillie Fraser attacked Jubbal with 500 soldiers. The British reached Sa rahan near Chau pal on 2 March
1815. Where Dangi Wazir and Primu of the princely state of Jubbal came and met them. 100 Gorkha
soldiers of Chaupal Fort surrendered and started supporting the British Army. Rawingarh Fort was
occupied by Ransur Thapa. Dangi Wazir and Wazir Badridas of Bushahr and Tikamdas attacked the
Rawingarh Fort. After the treaty negotiations the Gorkhas vaca ted the fort and Fraser's army took over
the front there. Gorkha army was led by Kirti Rana in Rampur Kotgarh region. Bushahr' army was led
by Badridas and Tikamdas. Kullu's armies also met him in 181 AD. Kirti Rana urrounded the Hatu
Fort. He surrendered and saved his life.
• Major General David Ochterlony : Major General David Ochterlony captured alagarh on 5th
November, 1814 AD through Ropar. After this the fo rt of Taragarh wa captured. Amarsingh Thapa
looks forward to taking a decision against the British near Ramgarh Fort. King Ramsharan Singh of
Hindur (Nalagarh) and King of KahJur decided to co-ope rate wi th the Bri tish. On January 16, 1815,
an attack was held on the fort of Ramgarh, from which Amar Singh Thapa had to go to Malaun Fort.
The British captured the fort of Ramgarh. The death of Bahadur Bhak ti Thapa in Malaun Fort and the
Kumaon defeat of Gorkhas forced Amar Singh Thapa to make a treaty. Amar Singh Thapa, accepted
by the honorable dedication of himself and his son Ranajor and his personal property, went to Nepal.
(3) Result of Gorkha-British War
• All the Gorkha regions from the Kali river to Sutlej came under the authority of the British.
• The situation of the English strengthened.
• The boundaries between the Britis~ and Nepal were fixed.
• The end of Gorkha dominance of ShimJa hill states and the expansion of English empire began.
• After the Gorkha-British war, the Treaty of Sugauli took place.
(iii) Treaty of Sugauli (1815 AD): The Treaty of Sugauli (28 November 1815 AD) ended the Gorkha-British war
and the Gorkhas accepted to go back to Nepal. The bilateral agreement between the two states was decided
by this treaty. All rights of the Sikkim state of Nepal were withdrawn. The British received many parts of
Garhwal, Kumaon, Shimla hill state and lowland between Kali river and Sutlej. An English resident was posted
in Kathmadu, Nepal's capital. In 1816, the Gorkhas accepted the conditions of the Treaty of Sugauli.
0 A4.2 QUESTION-ANSWERS
a. Who led the Gorkha army in 1805, who attacked Kangra? -Amar Singh Thapa
[A;sst. Conservator Forest Exam-2007, PGT (History)-2000, HAS (Main)-1998) [HP Patwari-2013]
a. In which year was the Treaty of Sugauli between the Gorkhas and the British was signed? -1815 AD
[Asst. Conservatar Forest E.xam-2007]
a. . What was the political impact of the Treaty of Sugauli of 1815 AD in hill areas of Himachal Pradesh and
Uttarakhand? -The impact Gorkhas of this sector was ended and the ·impact of the British started
[HAS (Main)-1 999]
a. By which treaty, Gorkhas left their claim on the hill states in 1815? -Treaty of Sugauli
[HAS (Main)-2012 held in 2014]
a. What did the Gorkhas do, under the leadership of Amar Singh Thapa, from 1805 to 1809? -In Mah.almorio,
defea~g Sansar Chand and campel him to hide in Kangra fort
a. The result of Malun and Ramshahr war of 1815 was. -Gorkha Defeat
a. During which period did the Gorkhas occupy t!'te parts of Bushahr state? -1803-1815 AD
[HP Vetnery Officer-201 l
a. Who led the campaign against Gorkhas in Chaupal, Jubbal and Rawingarh areas? -James Baillie Fraser
[HP Naib Tehs ildar (Pre)-20 14]
24
0 A4.2 OBJECTIVE-QUESTION
l. Which king of Bilaspur invited the Gorkhas to
support King Shankar Chand of Kangra? Ans.
10.
Ans.
2.
Ans.
3.
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Main)-2015]
(A) Bhima Chand (B) Mahan Chand
(C) Devi Chand (D) Khadak Chand
(B) Mahan Chand
On May 1815, which fort was fought in the British
and Gorkhas, where Bhakti Thapa was killed?
(A) Malaun
(C) Kotla
(A) Malaun
[HP Allied Services-2016]
(B) Kamlahgarh
(D) Lohgarh
Ans.
11.
Raja Sansar Chand had to seek external help to Ans.
expel Gorkha from Kangra. Who provided this 12.
crisis assistance? [HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2011]
(A) General Zorawar Singh
(B) Raja Gulab Singh
(C) Maharaja Ranjit Singh
(D) General Harl Singh Nalwa
Ans. . (C) Maharaja Ranjit Singh
4. Which two parties signed the Treaty of Sugauli in
Ans.
5.
Ans.
6.
Ans.
7.
Ans:
8.
Ans.
9.
1815? [HAS (Pre)-2007] [HP PTI-2014)
(A) King of Gorkha and Bushahr
(B) British and Maharaja Ranjit Singh
(C) _ Maharaja Ranjit Singh and Raja Sansar
Chand
(D) Gorkha and British
(D) Gorkha and Britisg
Where is the historic site of Mahalmoria, where Ans.
there was a war between Raja Sansar Chand and 13.
Gorkhas? [HP Clerk-2010]
(A) Chamba (B) Shimla
(C) Kangra (D) Hamirpur
(D) Hamirpur ·
In the year 1804 when the Gorkhas · attacked Ans.
Kangra, who was the King of Jaswan at that time? 14.
(A) Bhilpal (B) Umedchand
(C) Shrisingh (D) Roopchand
(B) Umedchand
In the ear1y nineteenth century who led the
Gorkha army who attacked many hill states?
[HP CDP0-2014] [HP Stat. Asst. (Pre)-2012]
(A) Amar Singh Thapa Ans.
(B) Maharaja Mahendra 15.
(C) Rana Jung Bahadur
(D) Arjun Singh Gorkha
(A) Amar Singh Thapa
Which of the Treaty indicates the departure of
the Gorkhas and the arrival of the British from
Shimla's political principals? (HAS (Pre)-2012] Ans.
(A) Treaty of Sug~uli (B) Treaty of Lahore 16-
(C) Treaty of Malao (D) Treaty of Ramgarh
(A) Treaty ofSugauli •
In 1805, which Gorkha leader of Kangra was I
defeated by Hamirpur? [HP ETI-2012]
(A) Aniruddh Thapa (B) Amar Singh Thapa Ans.
General Knowledge (Himachal Pradesh)
(C) Hira Singh Thapa (D) Manoj Thapa
(B) Amar Singh Thapa
In 1805, Amar Singh Thapa defeated Sansar
Chand at which place?
[HP Compu ter Operator-2010, 2013}
(A) Jwalamukhi (B) Mahalmoria
(C) Bilaspur (D) Luthyani
(B) Mahalmoria
How long did the Gorkhas hold power over the
princely state of Bilaspur?
(A) Till 1814 (B) Till 1817
(C) Till 1806 (D) Till 1820
(A) Till 1814
In the list-I, the names of the travelers and the
time of their visit to the list-LI are given:
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Main)-Oct. 2018)
List-I lis t-II
(z) Hiuen Tsang (a) 1815 AD
(iz) W. Moorcroft (b) 1820-22 AD
(iii) Alexander Gerard (c) 630 AD
(iv) J.B. Fraser (d) 1817-18 AD
Arrange the above mentioned according to the
year of their excursions by following code:
(z) (iz) (iiz) (iv)
(A) (c) (a) (b) (d)
(B) (c) (b) (a) (d)
(C) (c) (a) (d) (b)
(D) (c) (b) (d) (a)
(D) (c) (b) (d) (a)
During the first quarter of the nineteenth century,
what was the decisive battle between the Gorkhas
and the British? [HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2018]
(A) JaitakHills (B) Haripur Dhar
(C) Sen Dhar (D) Dharthi Dhar
(A) JaitakHills
In 1804AD, the rulers ofBilaspur, Mandi, Chamba
and small kings of Kangra district invited whom
to win Kangra? [HPAS (Pre) Exam-2018]
(A) Gorkha Army Chief Amar Singh Thapa
(B) British Army
(C) Mughal
(D) Maharaja Ranjit Singh
(A) Gorkha Army Chief Amar Singh Thapa
A decisive battle between Gorkha and Bushahr
kingdom in 1514 AD, in which Gorkhas were
banished, where was it?
(A) Arhal
[HP Asst. Prof (Economics)-2018]
(B) Krasa
(C) Chirgaon
(C) Chirgaon
(D) Khadrala
'Hatu Fort' in which area is located in Himachal
Pradesh?
(A) Mandi valley
(C) Sangla Valley
(D) None of these
[HP Clerk-Nov. 2018)
(B) Kullu valley
(D) None of these
History of Himachal Pradesh 25
0 A4.3 BRITISH EMPIRE EXPANSION
(Hill States under the Colonial Power)
Political and Administrative History Grants, Sanads and Territorial Aggression, Establishment of British
Contonments. [HPAS (Main) GS Paper-1, Unit-I, Sub Unit-III]
Q. 1. What does the word 'Sanad' mean? What was its validity?
[Sample Paper GS Paper-1 (8 Marks) HPAS (Main)]
Q. 2. Tell any three arguments on which the British policy was based on Shimla's hill states?
[HPAS (Main) GS Paper-1(4 Marks, 60 Words) (Dated=28-11-2017)]
HINT- ♦ Giving sanad ♦ policy of intervention ♦ recruitment of superintendents in the
formation of cantonments · ♦ cantonments in the principals of the state ♦ laps policy.
(i) Construction / Establishment of British Cantonments : At present, there are 62 Cantonment areas in the
country, which are under the Ministry of Defence of the Central Government. Himachal Pradesh also has seven
Cantonment areas which were established in British period. These cantonments are :
♦ Subathu: Subathu is located in District Solan. This was the military camp of Gorkhas in 1814-15. After the
Gorkha defeat in the fort at Malaun, the British established a cantonment in Subathu in May 1815. It was
the Nasiri Regiment created by defeated Gorkha soldiers. Before the Hindustan-Tibet road construction
(1850 AD), this camp was very important. L.ieutenant ROSS was appointed political observer in this area.
Kennedy stayed in Subathu before going to Shimla. William Bentinck came to Subathu for a trip in 1829.
♦ Kasauli : Solang district located in Kasauli, was the second cantonment e.stablished by the British in
Hirnachal Pradesh. It was established in 1842 AD. Previously, there was the Fort of Gorakhas, which was
used during the Gorkha-British War. Kasauli's name lies on Kasaul village. The soldiers of Kasauli were
robbed of the treasury in 1857 and they had got away from Nasiri Battalion of Jutogh.
♦ Jutogh : Jutogh Cantt (situated in Shirnla district) was the third campus established by the British in
Hirnachal Pradesh in 1843 AD. The British soldiers captured the Gorkha Regiment in 1814-15 in the Gorkha
war, and later it was made a cantonment in 1843 AD. In 1857, unqer the leadership of Subedar Bhirn Singh,
the Nasiri battalion of Jutogh"-r~olted.
♦ Dagshai : Solan district located at~tional Highway-22 (NH-5) in Dagshai (6078 feet high) was a Gorkha
fort during Gorkha-British War. Dagshlri,Cantonment was established in 1847 AD by acquiring five villages
from Maharaja BhupinderSingh of Patial~ere the prisoners were kept in the Mughal period. It is named
after the "Daag-e-Shahi" (Royal Stamp). Here ' a--c~ntral jail was also established in 1849. Four freedom
fighters of Komagata Maru were_ hanged here. The Irish soldiers rebelled here in the year 1920. ·
♦ Bakloh: Chamba district located in Bakloh was made a Cantonment in 1866. It is a cantonment of Category-4.
It became the encampment of Gorkh& soldiers.
♦ Dalhousie: Dalhousie was founded by Lord Dalhousie in 1.854 AD. The camp here was established in
1867. King Shri Singh of Chamba principality sent his soldier Dalhousie to help the British in the rebellion
of 1857.
♦ Yol: The British Army was established in Yol (Kangra) in 1849, but it got the status of cantonment in 1942.
♦ Most of the cantonments established b:x •he British Government in Himachal Pradesh are in the forts used
by Gorkha during the Gorkha-British wa ·. Most of the military encampments have been built by the Gorkha
soldiers who did not go, to Nepal after the Gorkha-British war of 1814-15.
(ii) British Administrative Policies for Hill States : After the Anglo-Gorkha War (1815 AD), the subordinate
principals of the Gorkhas came under the protection of the British. Similarly, after the first Anglo-Sikh war
(1846 AD), the princely states which were in control of the Sikhs, came under the control of all the English. The
British followed the following type of policy after 1815 AD to the hill states.
♦ Establishing British occupation by the Sanad
• · 'Sanad' is a type of deed, which was e:onferred by the British Empire for loc;al lordships allegiance to their
British government. The 'Sanad' was recogniz~d by the ruler of the principality and his descendants to
rule in his own kingdom.
• After the Gorkha-British war, David Ochterlony convened a meeting of 20 hill states of Shimla in Palasi
so that the areas acquired for Gorkha could be divided. As a result, Sirmaur (Fat~h Prakash, September
21, 1815 AD), Bilaspur (Mahanchand, March 6, 1815 AD), Hindur (Ram Sharan Singh, September
20, 1815 AD) Jubbal (Puranchand, 18 September, 1815 AD) Baghat (Mohinder Singh, 4th September,
26 General Knowledge (Hiniachal Pradesh)
1815 AD), Keonthal (Sansar Sen, power transfer in 1815; Sanand 5 April 1893), Baghal (Jagat Singh,
3rd September, 1815 AD), State of Busha~r (Moh~der Singh, Febru~ry 8~ 1816) was h~ded ov~r to
the respective owners of the state. Accordmg to this sanad, he and his childre1: were given the nght
to rule. Kumarsain (Rana Kehar Singh, 7 February 1816, AD), Balsan (YogaraJ, September 21, 1815
AD), Tharoch (Jhobu, 31 January 1819 AD), Mangal (Bahadur Shah, 20 Septembe~, 1815 A:D~, Dhami
(Govardhan Singh, September 4, 1815. AD) sanads were confer:ed on _the thakuraiyo as distinct. The
trenches of Khaneti and Delath were subjected to Bushahr while Koti, Ghund, Theog, Madhan and
Ratesh were given to the princely state of Keonthal. . . ..
• Under the Sanad, the hill states were required to follow certain conditions in retahation of Bntish
security. Like building 12 feet wide roads in your state. To assist the British including the porte_rs,
armed servants during the war. Let British merchants and goods pass fre~ in their _oWl! st~te and raise
forced labour if needed. The king should improve law and order and agriculture m his kingdom and
remove the grievances of the people. .
♦ Intervention Policy : English has strict control over the administration of the native rulers. The officers of
the company govemmept intervened in the economic, social and religious life of the people. .
♦ Christian Missionary : In 1853, the British established "Christian Moravian Mission" for the propagation
of Kinnaur and Lahaul-Spiti in their tribal areas and started functioning under the chairmanship of Dr.
A.D.H. Frankel. .
♦ Lapse's policy : In 1850, Governor-General Lord Dalhousie was stripped of his state on the basis of "the
policy of the lapse" after the death of the King of Baghat, he was not ancestral heir. ·
♦ Appointment of Superintendent: Mandi, Suket, Bilaspur and Chamba principals were appointed as 'Cis
Sutlej States' Superintendent and 'Shimla Hill States' was made subject to Shimla Superint~ndent.
♦ Appointment of deputy commissioner : In 1849, after the rebellion by the British in Kangra, the Kangra,
Kullu and Lahaul-Spiti were made a district administrative unit and sub-dep_uty commissioner.
♦ Formation of Military Camps and Cantonments : The British built trading centers, military camps and
military cantonments under the possession of the forts, territ~ries and land asse~s obtained from the
Gorkha war. The British rulers used to change their territory and borders of their own state. According
to this policy, in 1830, the British got 12 villages from Rana Sansar Sen of Keonthal and started building
Shimla city.
(iii) Relations to the Shimla Hill States of the British
♦ Bushahr : After the Battle of Gorkha, the British returned the kingdom of Bushahr to King Mohinder Singh
by a Sanad. Bushahr was the only state where the real kings were asked to give their principals an annual
tax of 15,000 rupees. In the year 1877 AD, the British accepted lease of 50 years in the Bushahr forests and
instead of accepting ten thousand rupees annually in exchange for their acceptance. In the year 1911, the
British appointed Alan Michael as the manager of Bushahr. In 1886, the British forced Shamsher Singh to
leave his throne in favor of his son Tikka Raghunath Singh. In the year 1898, after the death of Rajkumar,
instead of handing over the reins to Shamsher Singh, the British took _the job of making Rai Mangat Ram
an administrator. .
♦ Beja: After the Gorkha war, the British handed over the unbecoming Thakurai to Maan Chand by the
Sanad of September 4, 1815. During Uday Chand time, the villages of Nari and Chalhan were merged with
the British in Kasauli.
♦ Kunihar: After the Gorkha War, in 1815 AD, the British handed over Thakurai permanently to Magan Dev
by a sanad. In the year 1817 AD, the _ruler of this place was given full authority _to Hardev Singh.
♦ Bilaspur (Kahlur) : On March 6, 1815, the British gave the sanad to King Mahanchand of Bilaspur. Khadak
Chand, seated on the throne in 1824, he snatched the jagirs of most of his people. Civil war started under
the leadership of Mian Jangi. The King called for an army of 300 Rohilla Pathans to suppress the revolt,
which ca~d many clashes with Mian people. In 1827, William Murray (poli_tical representative) solved the
revolt agamst the three units of the army. He handed Mian Miri and Sansaru the administration's reins and
warned the King to improve his behavior. In the last days, Khadak Chand compromised Mian and returned
his jagirs. Khadak Chand died in 1839 AD. He had no son. Both of her queens were ready to be sati but
Russell Clark forbade them to do so and promised them generous grants. Russell Clark sent the Mian Jangi
to the government in 1839 AD to recommend to the government. On October 21, 1847, the king of Bilaspur
was granted the right of the state on the right side of the Sutlej which was under its control from 1809 AD.
Raja Vijay Chand (1888-1903) tried to run the administration of the state according to the British system but
the assistance of the authorities was not received. He went to Banaras to hand over the administration of the
minister to Harichand. Mian Amarchand and the British officers helped in the administration.
History of Himachal Pradesh ·21
♦ Jubbal : After the Gorkha war, on 18 November 1815, a princely state of Jubbal was handed over to King
Puma Chand. After sat on his throne, disorder spread in the state. Eventually, the British government
handed over the administration to Wazir Daugi. After the death of Wazir Daugi, in 1832 AD, appointed a
tehsildar for the administration of the government and the annual allowance of Rs. 4400 rupees was paid
to King Puranchand. The king died in 1840 AD, after which Rana Karamchand sat on the throne when he
attained majority in 1854 AD. His rule was very strict, so the -British government had to curb its political :
powers.
♦ Baghat : During the Gorkha war, the behavior of the King of Baghat was not friendly to the British. Due
to this, five parganas of Rs. 14000 rupees were handed over to the Maharaja of Patiala for one lakh thirty
thousand rupees. The remaining four parganas were handed over to Rana Mohinder Singh and his
successors by a charter on September 4, 1815. Rana Mohinder Singh died on January 11, 1839. The British
seized his kingdom. Rana's younger brother Vijay Singh received the throne in 1842 with the support of
George Russell Oark (political representative). In the state of Baghat; the British took the decision in favor
of Mian Jai Singh's son Dhyan Singh, in the event of the absence of the successor on the death of King
Kishan Singh.
♦ Hindur: On September 20, 1815, Raja Ramsharan Singh of Hindur was handed over the book property by
the Sanad, but the Malaun fort and village were taken, in return for which the king was handed over to
Thakurai of Bharauli. In return for the British assistance in the Sikh War (1846 AD), the fort was returned
to the King by the Sanad and the British regained control over Bharauli, which the king sold to the king of
Balsan for 8500 rupees.
♦ Keonthal : After the Battle of Anglo-Gorkha, on September 6, 1815, the King of Keonthal, Sansar Sen, was
returned to the state by the sanad but the eight parganas were kept by the British. The British took 12
villages from Rana of Keonthal in 1830 AD. In return, the king of Keonthal was given the Rawin Parganas.
Due to three complaints against the King of Keonthal; it was denied the state management. In 1840, he was ·
reassigned to the state. During the reign of King Balbir 9ingh, due to internal peace, in 1899, the British
appointed the manager here.
♦ Kotgarh, Kotkhai and Rawin : Kotgarh (Sandok) and Rawin occupied the British after the Gorkha war,
because there was the Hatu fort which was under the Kotkhai, but the king of Kotgarh gave it to the king
of Kullu. The king of Bushahr took away Rawin from the king of Kullu and took over the Kotkhai. Before
the Gorkhas, under Kotkhai Kullu (up to 40 years). After leaving Gorkha~ Kotgarh came_ under the rule of
Kullu. The British captured Kotgarh and brought it out of the Kullu king.
• Rawin who was the·jagir of Garhwal, was under the command of Bushahr. After the Gorkha war, it
became the right of the British, which was handed over to the King of Keonthal. (Instead of the village
received for settling Shirnla). ·
• Kotkhai was handed over to Rana Ranjit Singh and his descendants by a sanad. After Rana's death
in 1821, his son Bhagwan Singh sat on the throne. Under his reign the disorder spread, after which in
1828, the British took the government into their hands apd provided the king an annual pension of 1300
~~- .
♦ Kumarsain: After the battle of Gorkha, on February 7, 1816, Rana Kehar Singh was returned to the kingdom
by the Sanad. Rana Kehar Singh died on 11 May 1839. According to the terms of 'Sanad', his state was
merged with the English state. Given the loyalty of late Rana, Pritam Singh was given the right to sit on the
throne through 'Sanad'. After the revolt in the state, after which the political represertative of Shimla was
entrusted with the administration of the state. Pritam Singh was returned to the state on June 29, 1840, and
words like 'Nusalun', 'Badnusalun', 'Badh Buttanu' and 'Buttanu' were added to the Sanad. The King gave
the word to stop the practice of Sati and the slaughter of the girl who had been malpractice there.
♦ Tharoch: January 31, 1819, Thakur Chobu was regarded as the Thakur of Tharoch by the Sanad. The British
forced· the Chobu to leave his throne in favor of his son Shyam Singh. Due to the conspiracy· of Choba and
his nephew Ranjit Singh, Shyam Singh was abducted in 1841-and Thoroch was merged with Jubbal. At the
end of 27 June 1843, the son of Ranjit Singh and his descendants was accepted forever by a sanad.
♦ In Other Smaller Estates: In 1815 AD, the Vaghal estate of Raja Jagat Singh, the Kuthar Rana Bhup Singh,
Bhajji Rana Rudrapal, Dhami Govardhan Singh, Mahalog Thakur Sansar Chand, Beja Thakur Maan
Singh, Balsan Thakur Yograj, Sangiri Rana Vikramjeet was conferred to Darkoti Rana Surtes Ram and
Kunihar Thakur Magan Dev.
. 28 General Knowledge (Himachal Pradesh)
(iv) Relationships of the British from Other Hill States
♦ Sirmaur: On 21 September 1815, Fateh Prakash was placed on the throne of Sirmour by a sanad who was
only six years old at that time. Through this treaty, the British Government kept the areas of Momi of
the princely state of Sirrnaur, the fort of Jagatgarh, Kyarda Doon and Jaunsar-Bawar. Till Fateh Prakash
became an adult, Guleri Rani was allowed to run the administration under the supervision of Captain
Burch (Assistant State Representative in Nahan Darbar). Burch formed a council to advise the queen and
expelled Kishan Chand, the kingdom's dewan. On July 5, 1826, Fateh Prakash applied to the government
that after the Gorkha war, the government had kept the Jaunsar-Bawar, Kalsi, Kyarda Doon areas with
them, and returned them at the sight of one and a half lakh rupees. Fateh Prakash attended the 'Shirnla
Darbar' of Governor General Lord Amherst. The government refused to give the territory of Jaunsar-Bawar
to the king of Sirrnaur. On 5 September 1833, the government gave the Kyarda Doon Valley to Fateh Chand
for 50 thousand rupees by a sanad.
♦ Chamba : Under the rule of Chadat Singh (1808-1844) Chamba came under the rule of Ranjit Singh but
the independence of the Chamba monarc)1 continued. After the death of Chandat Singh in 1844, Shri
Singh became the King of Chamba. After the defeat of Sikhs, on March 16, 1846, the British signed a treaty
with the· British with Gulab Singh, according to which the British gave Guiab Singh all the area between
Ravi and Sindhu in 75 lakhs, in which Kashmir, Ladakh, Gilgit and Chamba There were also. Chamba
who was on both sides of Rav1 river (paying tax to the Sikhs) opposed the grant of Guiab Singh (King of
Jammu). Colonel Lawrence resolved the problem by mediating between Kashmir, Charnba and the British
Government. Chamba's independence was maintained by a sanad on April 6, 1848. It is decided to charge
rupees 12000 per year from Chamba. Bhaderwah area was merged with the state of Kashmir.
• In 1862 Major Blair Reed was appointed Superintendent of Chamba. In 1864, the King of Charnba
had leased all his forests. In 1913, full control of the forests was handed over to the King with some
conditions. After Major Blair Reed, Bernie was appointed manager in 1879 and H.T. Marshall was
appointed manager in 1885. After this, the termination of the post of manager was given full powers
to rule Singh.
♦ Kangra : After the death of Sansar Chand in 1823 AD, Aniruddh Chand (son of the Sansar Chand) sat on
the throne. In 1827, Aniruddh Chand had to take refuge in the kingdom of the British in the fear of Ranjit
Singh, because Ranjit Singh was pressurizing him to marry his sisters to King Dhyan Singh of Jammu. The
marriage of their sisters went to Aniruddha Chand Arki, from the King of Garhwal. He died in 1831. With
the intervention of the political representative. of Ludhiana, the sons of Anirud<;lha Chand, Ranbir Chand
and Pramod Chand got the reins back in 1833.
♦ Kullu : In 1841 AD, King Ajit Singh of Kullu died in Sangari. shri Erskine, superintendent of the hill states
of Shirnla, recommended the cousin of Ajit Singh to be king, but he died. After this Ajit Singh' s uncle
Thakur Singh was made a nominative king and he was given the jagir of Wazir-i-Rupi. After the first Sikh
war in 1846, the British became the right of the Kullu. Thakur Singh was considered a king. After :his death
in 1852, Cyan Singh succeeded him, but b~cause of being the son of the mistress, the British changed his
position from "Raja" to "Rai" and ended his political rights.
♦ · Mandi and Sul<et : March 9, 1846, the British came under the control of the Kangra, Guler, Jasnava,
Dattarpur, Nurpur, Mandi, Kullu and Lahaul-Spiti, through the Lahore Treaty (between Sikhs and the
British). On 24 October, 1846 AD, the King of Mandi was accepted by Balbir Sen (son of mistress!) by a
sanac!. After the death of Balbir Singh (1851 AD) his four year old son Vijay Sen became King. He attended
the Delhi Durbar of 1877 AD. Vijay Sen undertook many developmental works under the supervision of
E.W. Purkis. Suket helped the British in the Sikh war. So he was given a pe~anent inheritance in the state
by giving a charter in 1846. Mandi King Balbir Sen was asked to obey the words of the British on tax on iron
and.salt mines. Suket's King Dusht Nikandan Sen was a minor (in1879), then Sir Donald was appointed a
Wazir in 1884. . .
♦ Nurpur : 1848 AD Wazir Ram Singh Pathania of Nurpur ~d King Prarnod Singh of Kangra revolted in
which the kings of Jaswant and Dattarpur assisted. Commissioner Lawrence crushed the rebellion and
sent Prarnod Chand to Almora and Wazir Ram Singh Pathania, where they both died. Jaswant Singh, son
of King Veer Singh of Nurpur was given a manor of Rs 2000. ·
History of Himachal Pradesh 29
0 A4.3 QUESTION-ANSWERS
'l's. Which hill station was near Kalka, where at the beginning of the 19th century did the English political
representative start living? -Subathu [HAS (Main)-2008]
'l's. When did the British rulers organize Kangra, Kullu and Lahaul-Spiti regions as a district? -In 1846 AD
(March 16) '[HP SAS (Main)-2016 held in Feb. 2017]
'l's. By which treaty did the British government split Lahaul into 'British Lahaul' and 'Chamba Lahaul'? -
Amritsar Pact (March 16, 1846) [HP SAS (Main)-2016 held in Feb. 2017]
'l's. Which year did the Treaty of Sugauli between the Gorkhas and the British? -In 1815 AD
'l's. [HAS (Main)-2015 held in Sept. 2016]
'l's. After the Treaty of Lahore in 1846, which British governor general had taken over many Himachali hill
states including Kangra and Mandi?-Lord Dalhousie [HAS (Main)-2007]
'l's. When the British invaded Himachal Pradesh in 1814 AD, against. whom did the Himachali rulers fight? -
Against Gorkha's (Amar Singh Thapa) [HAS (Main)-2001]
'l's. After the Lahore Treaty made in 1846, what was the expectation of the British in return for their support
against the rulers of Himachal Pradesh, against the rulers of the princely states? -It was expected to
maintain unwavering existence, good justice and recognition of their ancestral rights. [HAS (Main)-1999]
'l's. Which English commander defeated the Gurkhos' (Gorkhas) and compelled them to make a treaty of
Sugauli in 1815?-David Ochterlony [HAS (Main)-1998] [HAS (Main)-2012 held in 2014]
'l's. The first commander to establish power of the British on hill states of Himachal Pradesh by fleeing the
Gorkhas - David Ochterlony
'l's. Who was the Governor General of India when the British captured Kangra, Guler, Jasvan, Dattarpur,
Nurpur, Suket, Mandi, Kullu and Chamba in 1846 AD? -Lord Hardinge .
'l's. In which year did Queen Victoria declare herself the emperor of India?-ln 1876 AD
'l's. Where did Lord Dalhousie take his summer headquarters after of Russia's shadow on Tibet? -Chine
(Kalpa)
'l's. In 1848, when Pramodchand authorized the British army to cast Kangra, who had declared the independence?
-Jasw.an (Una) of Umede Singh, Jagat Chand of Dattarpur, Sikh Saint-Bedi Vikram Singh.
'l's. Shimla hill principality were tinde~ British occupancy, at that time (1809 to 1846) Kangra, Kullu, Lahaul
Spiti was occupied. -Of Sikh's
0 A4.3 OBJECTIVE-QUESTIONS
1. Which country of the Kangra Group of States
stood up in the nuisance against the British in the
Ans.
2.
Ans.
3.
Ans.
4 ..
year 1848? [HP PGT (Music Vocal)-2016]
(A) Sibba (B) Nurpur
(C) Jaswan . (D) Guler
(B) Nurpur
Where do the graves of the British who died in
the Anglo-Gorkha War of 1814-15 are in which of
the following places? .
[HP Asst. Prof CC (History)-2014]
(A) Kunihar valley (B) Valh valley
(C) Danwi valley (D) Lohar Valley
(D) Lohar Valley
The first Nasiri battalion were in the -
(A) Rohilla
(C) Gorkha
(C) Gorkha
[HP Asst. Prof (CC)·English-2016]
(B) Jat
(D) Rajptit
Did the British named the hill states of Punjab on
the right side of the river Sutlej as the hill state
and the hill states of the Shimla Hill State? Which
state was not included in the two categories under
this division, because the Sutlej river divided this
estate from the middle to two equal parts?
[HP Asst. Prof Civil Engg. T.E.-2015]
Ans.
s:
Ans.
(A) Suket
(C) Kutlahar
(D) Kahlur
(B) Hindur
(D) Kahlur
British gave whom the status of 'Punjab Hill
States'? [HP DPRO-2014]
(A) Estates which were under Maharaja Ranjit
Singh.
(B) Estates won by the British in the BritishGorkha
War.
(C) Estates which were situated on the right bank
of the River Sutlej.
(D) Who used.to be from Punjab
(C) Estates which were situated on the right bank
of the River Sutlej.
6. Which Governor General of India had helped
King Ranbir Chand of Kangra to take over
Maharaja Ranjit Singh from some part of his
stat-e? · [HP Law Officeri(Industries)-2015]
(A) Lord Wellesley
Ans.
(B) Lord William Bentinck
(C) Lord Camwallis
(D) Lord Dalhousie
(B) Lord William Bentinck
30
7. By whom did the British government control the
princely states? [HP Lecturer (ASH) Maths-2016]
(A) Political agent
(B) Resident Commissioner
(C) Superintendent (of state)
(D) All of the above
Ans. (D) All of the above
8. In which year the sovereignty of the areas
between Beas and Sutlej came under the British
Government? [HP Lecturer Polytechnic-2016]
(A) 1815 AD (B) 1830 AD
(C) °1846 AD (D) 1848 AD
Ans. (C) 1846 AD
9. What action was taken by the British Government
through the "Shimla declaration"?
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2013]
(A) Declaration of war against Afghanistan
(B) Treaty with Maharaja Ranjit Singh
(C) Establishment of the first church in Shimla
(D) Launch of Kalka-Shimla Railway Line
Ans. (A) Declaration of war against Afghanistan
10. Viceroy had supported the selection of Shimla as
the summer capital of British India-
" It is the only place in India where a Viceray could
keep himself free from all the friction." ·
(A) Lord Curzon
(C) Lord Reeding
Ans. (A) Lord Curzon
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2013]
(B) Lord Minto
(D) Lord Chelmsford
11. In ----AD Kangra, Kullu and Lahaul-Spiti
inferior to the English. [HP PTI-2012]
(A) 1850 (B) 1860
(C) 1846 (D) 1854
Ans. (C) 1846
12. Being overwhelmed by Nal-Dehra natural
beauty, a British Viceroy named her daughter
there only. It was [HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2011]
(A) Lord Minto (B) Lord Curzon
(C) Lord Elgin (D) Lord Dufferin
Ans. (B) Lord Curzon
13. Who led the campaign against Gorkhas in
Chaupal, Jubbal and Rawingarh areas?
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2014]
(A) David Ochterlony · (B) James Baillie Fraser
(C) Martindale (D) Gillespie
Ans. (B) James Baillie Fraser
14. What was the result of the Treaty of Sugauli
~igned in 1815? . [HAS (Pre)-2004]
(A) The Gorkhas dominated and consolidated
the conquered territories.
(B) The rise of the British as an influential force
(C) The end of the dominion of the Sikhs
(D) King Sansar Chand being the emperor
Ans. (B) The rise of the British as an influential force
General Knowledge (Himachal Pradesh)
15. Which Governor General did the work of the last
state of the princely states? [HAS (Pre)-2004]
(A) Lord Cornwallis (B) Lord Hardinge
(C) Lord Dalhousie (D) Lord Canning
Ans. (C) Lord Dalhousie
16. Who said this?
"I and the King of China rule over half the people
(empire) of the world, yet we get time for vreakfast in
the morning." [Led. College (Z.OOiogy)-2009]
(A) Lord Liton (B) Lord Auckland
(C) Lord Dalhousie (D) Lord Amherst
Ans. (D) Lord Amherst
17. In which year was the Kotkhai got mixed up in
the British Empire? [Leet. College (Physics)-2005]
(A) In 1820 (B) In 1828
(C) In 1846 (D) In 1857
Ans. (C) .In 1846
18. When did the European traveler Moorcroft visit
Himachal Pradesh? [HAS (Pre)-2008]
(A) 1880-1882 (B) 1855-1856
(C) 1820-1822 (D) 1825-1827
Ans. (C) 1820-1822
19. Which of the following was exiled to Singapore
after the declaration of its native state during
the reign of Governor-General Lord Dalhousie?
[HAS (Pre)-2006]
(A) Wazir Ramsingh Pathania
(B) Rana of Rawingarh
(C) Shivanand Ramaul
(D) Pandit Padamdev
Ans. (A) Wazir Ramsingh Pathania
20. Which year did Mandi, Suket, Kangra and Spiti
come under the British?
(A) 1809 AD (B) 1830 AD
(C) 1846 AD (D) 1858 AD
Ans. (C) 1846 AD
21. In 1863, which British officer was appointed for
the first time to take care of the Chamba state?
(A) Major Blair Reed (B) Cunningham
(C) Lord Lawrence (D) Lord Dalhousie
Ans. (A) Major Blair Reed
22. Which state of Kangra was pleased with the
services of the British, who gave him the title of
'Maharaj' during World ,War I?
(A) Jaichand (Bf Garun Chand
(C) Ratanchand (D) Harichand
Ans. (A) Jaichand
23. Which year did "Lord Mayo" come first for
Mandi?
(A) 1862
(C) 1871
Ans. (C) 1871
(B) 1866
(D) 1876
'
History of Himachal P~desh 31
24. Where was Ram Singh, the deputy Wazir of (A) 1870AD (B) 1889 AD
Nurpur, who caused the British to be killed in the (C) 1909 AD (D) 1919 AD
second Anglo-Sikh war? Ans. (C) 1909 AD
[Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2008] 27. According to the Sanad given to the King of
(A) Andaman (B) Dehradun Sirmaur in 1815 AD, which of the following areas
(C) Singapore (D) Adan . was returned to him?
Ans. (C) Singapore [HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre.) 2017]
25. In which year did Rana was given the title of (A) Jaunsar-Bawar (B) Mourni
King by the British Government? (C) Babur (D) Qiar-da-Doon
[HP Allied Services-2015] Ans. (D) Kiar-da-Doon
(A) in 1857 (B) in 1882 28. Which of the following was the final thakurai to
(C) in 1909 (D) in 1911 receive the Sanad from the British Government?
Ans. (A) in 1857 [HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre.) 2017]
26. In which year did the title of King to the Jagirdar (A) Kumarsain (B) Kuthar
of Lambagraon was given? (C) Darkoti (D) Tharoch
[HP Lecturer Communication Engg. 2016] Ans. (D) Tharoch
0 A4.4 BETH, BEGAR AND REET
(Social and Economic Conditions Under Colonial Period with Special Reference to Social Practices of
Beth, Begar and Reet) [HPAS (Main) GS Paper-1, Unit-I, Sub Unit-III]
Q. 1. When was the begar system ended in the Shimla hill state? Whose credit is it?
· [8 Marks, Sample Paper GS Paper-1, HPAS (Main)]
Q. 2. Define 'Reet'? Describe the events that release the end of this social evil.
[4 Marks, Sample Paper GS Paper-1, HPAS (Main)]
Q. 3. What do you think of the Bethu system? Discuss.
HINT- Please see part (i) for this.
(i) Beth : The practice of getting service from lower castes without wages by the upper castes is called Beth. Here,
Beth was occupied by Shimla Hill State in a manner similar to Jajmani system. Lower castes used to work like
the servants of the upper castes, which included all kinds of work. The Koli caste was mostly a Beth provider.
These people used to provide service without wages in land of the Jagirdars which is called Basa. The practice
of exchange of Beths was also popular. If the land was given to the girl in the form of dowry then the people
who got the land would have got Beths also. 'f!lese Beths did not get the right of ownership of the land. The
people of the lower castes also used to do the lower works for the brotherhood of the village. According to 1889
Shimla District Gazette, Koll Beth were 20 percent of the district in the division; 96% land was in possession of
Jagirdars in kotkhai who used to Beth from the lower castes. Beth wages were also popular in Rampur Bushahr.
Beth system was also popular in reserved forests in British period.
Instead of 'Beth' service, 'Chak' (food), 2 pairs of cloths and one-tenth of the crop was given. Later, in 1940,
instead of Chak (food) 3 'Ana' were given for the day and 12 to 18 rupees per year instead of the share of crop. In
the British cantonment areas, many people used to pay cash in exchange for service, in which work like porter,
hand rickshaw driver was included. In 1939, the British asked the loeal kings to give land ownership rights to
·the Beths. Make arrangements for giving land to the peopli, on which they were working or compensation of
land. On August 24, 1943, the Shimla Hill State ended up making a policy by establishing ·a policy of Beth
and Begar. Beths of the State got free.dom from all forms of slavery except raising sedan (Palki Uthana). Beths
who were working on the lands for three generations, were given ownership right of the land by the Jagirdars
and the rest-were given the rightto get ownership of the land by paying compensation. Beth system has not
been completely eliminated. It has now taken the form of cash wages.
(ii) Begar: The practice of getting work done without wages from the people is called Begar. The Begar work done
by the lowers castes for the upper castes is called Beth, which we have described already. Apart from this,
people we:r:e also made to Begar by the State. Two forms of Begar were prevalent.
♦ Athwara Begar : In Athwara Begar, work was done witho~t wages throughout the year in which the
following types of work included-
• Freight load
• . Checkposts, Guarding of checkposts
32 General Knowledge (Himachal Pradesh)
• Postal service and sending messages from one state to another
• Road construction and maintenance
• Performing tasks such as labour, cooking, playing drums and chasing prey for British officers on
hunting
• Bring woods and grass for royal families
♦ Hela Begar : On some special occasions such as birth, death, marriage, etc., Begar which was performed by
the King, was called Hela Begar. In this, the Brahmins, Rajputs, Gram Devata and the Royal People were
exempted from work. In this period, the Jagirdars had to do Begar in the important State subjects.
• Sanad : British authorities recognized the practice of Begar during Sanad in 1815 and its types, quantity
etc. were mentioned in Sanads.
• Dumha Movement: Against Begar, there was a Dumha movement led by the Kanets. Koli people were
also with them. These people did not give Begar and in protest the whole village used to flee. These
people used to leave the village moving on to the jungles and high hills. Sometimes these movements
became violent too. In 1854, in Rampur Bushahr, farmers stopped working in fields against the
British revenue system. In Sirmaur in 1880, the Dumh movement became violent. There was a Dumh
movement in Bhagal State against Athwara l3egar in 1905. In 1909, Shobharam launched a movement
on the lines of Dumha movement, in Mandi. There was a public protest movement against Begar.
Pajota Movement, Dhami Movement etc. were all against the Begar system.
• End of the Begar System : Satyanand Stokes launched a movement for the end of the Begar system. In
the year 1939, in Ludhiana, All India State People Congress, Nehru expressed concern about the Begar
system. Political Representative of the hill states of Punjab (Political Agent) started investigating the
system of Begar in 1941. On August 24, 1943, the hill states of Shimla created a policy and ended the
system of Beth and Begar. Under the pressure of the Praja Manda! movement and the pressure of the
National Movement, the hill states of Shimla had to end the begar system.
(iii) Reet : Meaning of 'Reet' is the value of jewelery and clothing given to the wife at the time of marriage by
the Husband. In this, other related expenses related to him are also added. When the relationship of -spouse
becomes tense, the girl goes to her parents' house. If the father of the girl becomes ready to give his son-in-law
the amount of custom and 'one rupee' which is called 'Ched Karai', then the divorce process is complete. One
of the eight marriages of the Shastras resembled it with the Asura marriage. ·
♦ Sirmaur Gazette : According to the Sirmaur Gazette, the Reet is a contract wedding that the woman can
break by giving compensation.
♦ Dr. Y.S. Parmar : According to Dr. Y.S. Parmar, Reet was a system of arranged marriage for some and
remarriage or divorce for some. In Kangra, Bushahr, Kullu, Siraj, Lahaul they considered the Reet as a
marriage, whereas in Sirmaur it was a form of div.orce. In Sirmaur, the woman could return Reet to her
husband and choose other husband and the previous husband could not even refuse to accept Reet. He
could object to the amount of Reet.
♦ Colonel Base : In 1925 Colonel Base did not consider it a marriage, but the exemption of compensation for
first husband and exemption for second marriage with her own will.
♦ Reet was a temporary marriage in which no ceremony was held. In this, the woman used to make her lover
as her new husband, if he (lover) would return the bride money to her first husband, he gave the woman's
parents at the time of marriage. It was prevalent in the upper Shimla and Sirmaur of Himachal Pradesh. At ·
Rampur Bushahr, at the time of marriage, the husband used to give ornaments and clothes to his wife, in
many places, the price was fixed from Rs 100 to 2000 rupees. Reet was popular in Himachal Jubbal, Bushahr,
' Bhagal, Nalagarh, Theog, Bhajji, Dhami, Kunihar, Delath, Mandhan Mandi, Suket, Sirmaur, Chamba,
Bilaspur. In Kangra, Kullu, Lahaul there was a variety of arrangements in the system. Reet marriage was
rare in Brahmins, Rajputs, but reet were practiced in Koli, Bhat and Khaneti.
♦ Himalaya Vidyalaya Sammelan Sabha (HVPS) : Demanded to abolish this in the Hindu Conference
1924 in Shimla. In 1924, Thakur Surat Singh of the Himalaya Vidyalaya Parishad wrote a letter to the
Superintendent of Shimla Hill State demanding to abolish this practice because it was promoting family
disintegration and smuggling of women. . · . ·
♦ Streets of Hill State and Bntish Government : The British Government initially kept it apart sayir.g
that it is the internal matter of the states; Raja Rana Dalip Singh of Baghat created a law against Reet
in 1917, according to which the marriage of a married woman whose husband was alive was declared
►
History of Himachal Pradesh 33
illegal. Registration and inquiry of marriage was started tn Bhagal State in 1924. In the Bushehr princely
state, inter-caste marriages were banned, in addition to the order of the Brahmans and Rajputs to perform
theological marriages.
Most of the kings took Reet' s side and opposed to ~he removal. Kati, Ratesh, Kahlur, Bhajji, Nalagarh,
· Mandhan, Jubbal, Theog, Kuthar and Kuhmarmen Thakurai and principals refused to make laws on the
ritual. ·
♦ Ended of Reet : Completion of the Rule in Himalaya Vidyalaya Sammelan Sabha and Under British
pressure, on July 16, 1926, 21 hill states decided to eliminate the Reet and make rules related to marriage.
♦ Effect of Reet : In addition to the bad effects of the influence of the Reet, some positive effects were also
seen, such as decrease in virginity in Kangra, child marriage in other areas, widow marriage, easy divorce,
bridegroom in place of dowry etc. empowers th~ situation.
0 A4.4 QUESTION-ANSWER
~ What is Begar? ~Get People to work without wages.
~ What is Beth'? -Service instead for land.
~ Who raised the voice first against the begar system in Shimla? -Samuel Evans Stokes
~ In which state of Himachal Pradesh, in 1939 did the demand for the abolition of begar system was done?
-Dhami state [Asst. Conservator Forest Exam-2007]
~ In 1939, which country passed the proposal of the government to end begar system, resulting in the fired
by the police in fierce crowd? -Dhami state [HAS (Main)-2005]
0 A4. 4 OBJECTIVE-QUESTIONS
1. . Which people of the princely state of Himachal
Pradesh had demanded the abolition of "Begar
System", which resulted in police firing on
protesters?
[HP Non Med. TET-2013] [HAS (Pre)-2007]
(A) Suket (B) Charnba
(C) Dhami (D) Keonthal
Ans. (C) Dhami
2. With whose support and encouragement did the
people of Suket rebell against the state in the year
1929 refusing to do 'Begar'?
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Main)-2011]
(A) Indian National Congress
(B) All India State Peoples Conference
(C) Revolutionari~s of the Ghadar Party
0 · -A4.5 REBELLION OF 1857 AD
(National Movement in Himachal Pradesh 1848-1948)
(D) Indian Kisan Sabha
Ans. (C) Revolutionaries of the Ghadar Party
3. What did the 'Begar System' prevail in some
other states of Himachal Pradesh?
Ans.
4.
.. [HAS (Pre)-2004]
(A) Unemployment
(B) To do forced work without paying wages
(C) Bonded wages
(D) Ownership of the plunger's land
(B) To do forced work without paying wages
Which year was the practice of Reet marriage in
Bushahr state was ended?
(A) 1915AD . ·
(C) 1925AD
Ans. (C) 1925 AD
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre.)-2017]
(B) 1920 AD
(D) 1930AD
[HPAS (Main) GS p~per-1, Uni_t-1, Sub Unit-III] .
(i) Important British of~cials at the ti.me of the rebellion of 1857-
,,, ♦ Shimla' s deputy com!)1issioner -Lord William Hay
t-- . Superintendent of Hindustan-Tibet Road -Captain David Briggs
♦ Commander-in-Chief of the British Army -General George Anson
♦ Quarter Master General -Colonel A. Baker · : ·
♦ Assistant Commissioner of Kasauli-P. M.a xwell .
♦ Chief Commissioner of Punjab -John Lawrence British Political Agent
♦ After the death of General Anson, the new Commander-in-Chief -Sir H. Bernard
♦ Commissioner of Trans Sutlej State - Edward John Lake
♦ Superint~ndent Shimla Hill States -Major G.C. Barnes
♦ Dharamshala police commander -Captain Younghusband
34 General Knowledge (Himachal Pradesh)
♦ Deputy Commissioner of Kangra - Reynal Taylor
♦ British Commandor of Sirmaur Battalion - Major Charles Reed
♦ Judicial Commissioner of Punjab-Robert Montgomery
(ii} Local Revolutionary and King during the rebellion of 1857 AD
· ♦ Leader of the 'Nasiri Army' (Jutogh Rebellion) leader-Subedar Bhim Singh
♦ Leader of Kasauli Rebellion -Daroga Budhi Singh
♦ King of Bushahr -Shamsher Singh
♦ Shirnla (Spatu resident) leader of the secret organization -Ram Prasad Bairagi
♦ King of Kahlur - Hirachand
♦ King of Sirmaur -Shamsher Prakash
♦ Assistant Administrator of Sirmaur -Kunwar Surj~n Singh and Kunwar Veer Singh
♦ King in Sujanpur Tira -Pratap Chand
♦ Son of King Kishan Singh of Kullu -Yuvraj Pratap Singh ·
♦ King of Chamba -Shri Singh
♦ Wazir of Chamba - Mian Attar Singh
♦ King of Mandi - Vijay Sen
♦ Wazir of Mandi -Wazir Gossaun
(iii) Events before 1857 AD : With the Treaty of Lahore, the hill kings became disillusioned with the British, because
the British did not give them their old Jagirs. Secondly, in the British-Sikh war (1848 AD), the princely states of
Kangra Hill supported the Sikhs against the British. Hills states of of Nurpur, Kangra, Jaswan and Dattarpur
revolted against the British in 1848, which was suppressed by Commissioner Lawrence. Everyone was arrested
and taken to Almora where he died. Wazir Ram Singh Pathania of Nurpur proved to be a tough knife for the
British. They defeated the British in "Dale Ki Dhar" near Shahpur. He was cheated by a Brahman Pahadchand.
Wazir Ram Singh Pathania was sent to Singapore where he died. In the Himachal Pradesh, the first spark of
revolt against the company government was triggered in Kasauli military camp in April 20, 1857 when six
native soldiers of the Ambala Rifle Depot set fire to a police post in Kasauli.
(iv) Reasons of 1857 AD revolution
♦ ~ Dissatisfaction in Public : In the public the rage was spread among people by_unnecessary interference
and partisan policies in the religious life and social customs of the public.
♦ Discontent Among in Hill Kings : Unnecessary interference in dynasties of Shimla and ending of many
dynasties of Kangra's hill kingdoms, there was discontent in the hill kings.
♦ Discriminatory Treat of Native Soldiers: Any Indian soldier could not become a staff officer. Government
intervened in the 'social and religious life of the soldiers. The largest Indian officer in the army was under
the British Army's smallest British officer. They were also sent to fight outside India.
♦ Lord Dalhousie's Policy of Lapse (expenditure) was also the reason for the revolution of 1857 AD.
♦ Cartridges containing Fat (Charbi): New Rifles which are called the Enfield Rifles contains cow and pig fat
cartridges, which Hindus and-Muslim soldiers refused to use. This rifle was an immediate reason for the
revolution of 1857 AD.
(v) the commencement of the Revolution of 1857 AD in the Shimla Region : In May 11, 1857 AD new·s of the
revolt and massacre of Meerut, Ambala and Delhi reached Shimla: Commandar-in-chief of the British Army,
General George Anson ordered the soldiers of Jutogh, Sapatu, Dagshai and Kasauli soldiers to travel to Ambala
and he also march towards Ambala hurriedly. The native army did not consider his order.
♦ Terrorism in Shimla region : As per the instructions of General Nicholas Penny the 800 European women,
men and children were gathered in the church first and later Shimla Bank (Grand Hotel). Lord William
Hay, d~puty commis~ioner_of Shimla, was unable to ~rovide security to the people. European people took
shelter m the D~gsha_1 soldier Barracks and J~ga RaJmahal\ Some Englishmen came to the refuge of the
rulers of Dham1, Koh, . Balsan and Baghat. MaJor General GC\vanz took shelter at the king of Junga with
family on 15th May, 1857 AD. Colonel Keith Young and Colonel Greathed also took sheiter with the family
along with the king of Keonthal. -\
♦ Rebellion under the leadership of Bhim Singh by "Nasiri battalion": Deployed in the rebellion by Nasiri
B~ttalion (Gor~a Regiment), captured Jutogh ~an~ and treasure under the leadership of Subedar Bhim
Smgh of the native army. On 16 May 1857, the md1genous soldier~ of Kasauli's Nasiri unit rebelled and
atta~ked the British army of Kasauli. The British escaped from the camp with Captain Blackall. N~siri
contingent captured the treasure and started moving towards Jutogh. Subedar Bhim Singh was the leader
History of !~imachal Pradesh 35
ot this native army. Under the leadership of Subedar Bhim Singh, the Revolutionary Army of Kasauli
robbed arms and belongings by setting fire on the lines of George Anson at Haripur towards Ju togh. After
Nasiri armys leaving Kasauli, the local police guard took control of the revolution. Its leader became Cantt
police station officer Budhi Singh. In his leadership, the revolutionaries captured the treasury of Kasauli
and moved towards Jutogh to fight the British. The British caught some, some were killed in the encounter,
Budhi Singh shot himself. On May 18, 1857, 'Captain Moffat', from Dagshai, Captain Brooke and Sapatu,
Carnal Kangrib reached Kasauli with his soldiers. On 24 May 1857, Jutogh's Revolutionary Nasiri Army
convened a meeting under the leadership of Subedar Bhim Singh and considere~ the proposal of Captain
David Briggs (Superintendent of Hindustan Tibet Road) and Deputy Commissioner William Hay. Due to
lack of support from the revolutionaries of Delhi, Meerut and Ambala, Jutogh's Nasiri army decided to
postpone the rebellion.
♦ Ram Prasad Bairagi : The secret organization in Tamilnadu was working against the British whose leader
was Ram Prasad Bairagi. Ambala' s Commissioner G.C. Barnes caught some letters of this organization on
June 12, 1857, that Ram Prasad Bairagi sent the Subedar of Nasiri Battalion to Saharanpur a.nd Maharaja
Patiala's lawyer to protest against the British. Ram Prasad Bairagi was arrested and taken to Ambala jail
and hanged him there.
♦ The Rule of Bushahr Estate: The Bushahr state did not e0operate with the British during fhe rebellion of
1857. King Shamsher Singh of Bushahr stopped paying annual salary of 15,000 to the British and did not
provide any kind of economic and military assistance and declared the state independent. An adverse
attitude towards English officers, employees, tourists and businessmen was adopted. Shirnla's deputy
commissioner, William Hay and the Political Agent of the hill kingdoms wanted to take action against the
king of Bushahr, but d~e to lack of army and the construction of the Hindust.m-Tibet road, he could not
take any action against the king.
♦ Support of Hill State : On May 27, 1857, after the death of British Commander General George Anson
in Ambala, Sir H. Bernard was appointed as the new Commander-in-Chief. On May 28, 1857, the native
soldiers of Jutogh, Sapatu, Kasauli, Dagshai and Kalka decided to abandon the rebellion. On 7th June, 1857,
Shimla Municipal Committee's Provident Colonel C.D. Blair sent a letter to Punjab's Chief Commissioner,
Lawrence, asking Captain Briggs to give the power of martial law to protect Shimla. As a res1, it, On August
7, 1857, William Hay appointed 50 soldiers of the princely state of Kahlur in Baluganj under the leadership
of Kunwar Vir Singh, 60 soldiers of Sirmaur princely state at Bada Bazar, 60 soldiers of the princely state
of Keonthal, Dhami, Bhajji and Koti at the residence of deputy commissioner went. Apart from this, 250
soliders were appointed for the emergency by the rulers of Baghal, Jubbal, Koti, Keonthal ar: :- Dharni.
(vi) Sirmaur Estate : On 11 May 1857, General George Anson ordered the Gorkha troops of Sirrna · . · battalion
statio~ed at Nahan in the princely state of Sirmaμr to march to Ambala, which the soldiers refused to obey.
King Sham.sher Prakash of Sirmaur was only 11 years old. Kunwar Surjan Singh and Veer Singh were appointed
administrators to aid the minor king, which brought to an end the discontent of the general public and the
Sirrnour battalion.
(vii)Activities of Kangra Region: On May 14, 1857 AD, Major Reynal Taylor, Deputy Commissioner, Kangra,
received information of the revolt in Dharamsala. The Kangra fort was under the command of Major Patterson's
4-Native Infantry native army. In the regiment fear of revolt, the British officers wanted to capture the fort
by the faithful army. Kangra Deputy Co~issioner, Major Reina! Taylor, took shelter in the Kangra Fort for
protection of the police battalion, causing a delicate situation in Dhararnsala. On 23 May 1857, according to
the order of the Judicial. Commissioner of Punjab, Robert Montgomery, the movement of sadhus, fakirs,
beggars and tourists in the entire Kangra region was stopped. Deputy Commissioner, Taylor, took 100 soldiers
of 'Sherdil Police Battalion' to pressurize the Nurpur rebellion, but before reaching them, Major Bilki, local
commander of 4 Native Infantry, agreed to allow the native soldiers to leave the weapon. In this way, the British
took the forts of Nurpur and Kangra completely under their control. Raja Pratap Chand of Sujanpur Tira wa"
also secretly preparing for a revolution in his fort, in which the revolutionaries of Tira were helping_him.
(viii) Rebellion in Kutlu region: In the plan of Jan Kranti scheme in the kullu area was led by local Yuvraj Prat p
Singh (son of King Kishan Singh of Kullu). In 1846, during the Mudki-Aliwal war between Sikhs and the
British, he reached Siraj while fighting against the British and became healthier after some time. The English
thought him dead. _In 16 May 1857, he awakened the sense of freedom in the entire Siraj region, in which his
chief adviser and associate were his brother Mian Veer Singh (resident of Baijnath, Kangra). Pratap Singh and
his accomplice Veer Singh were arrested and hanged on 3 August 1857 in Dharamsala.
36 General Knowledge (Himachal Pradesh)
(ix) Chamba Estate : The citizens of Chamba did not take participate in the revolt of 1857 AD. Raja Shri Singh of
Chamba remained loyal to the British government. On the orders of John lawrence, British Political Agent
and Chief Commissioner of Punjab, on May 16, 1857, the police guards were guarded on all major routes of
the state. The British settled in Dalhousie with the rebellion of 36-Native Infantry and 61-Native Infantry in
Jalandhar. Some women and children took shelter at the King of Chamba. For the safety of Dalhousie a military
detachment was sent under the leadership of Mian Attar Singh.
(x) Mandi Estate : During the rebellion of the 1857 AD, Vijay Sen, the king of Mandi, was only ten years old. The
British made Wazir Gossaun the Wazir and Administrator ot t.li.e Mandi State. The faithful Wazir Gossaun of
the English suppressed the revolt even before it fired. He sent 125 gunmen for the demand of the British officers
to suppress the una-Hoshiarpur rebellion. On May 28, 1857, for the protection of Nalagarh, on the orders of
Edward John Lake, Commissioner of Trans-Sutlej States, 60 infantry troops. Wazir Goshanu provided 50 British _
soldiers to suppress Jalandhar rebellion. In the form of war funding, Mandi Principal presented a total of Rs
125,000 to the British government. Wazir Goshanu provided himself 15,000 rupees with his personal account.
(xi) The end of the revolt in Himachal: By August 14, 1857, revolution in Shimla, Kangra, Kullu, Nalagarh and
other hill states had slowed down. In this revolution, 50 Himachali revolutionaries were hanged, 500 were
jailed and 30 were expelled and their properties were confiscated. _
(xii) After 1857, the Revolution of Constitutional and Administrative Development: After the revolution of 1857
AD, 'Government of India Act, 1858' was implemented in Himachal and all India. On 1 November 1858, Queen
Victoria's Declaration was announced by Lord Canning in Allahabad. It was also published in Shimla and
pasted at major places in the city.
The Administrative System of Himachal Pradesh : According to the Act of 1858, under the Goverrurient of
India Act, 1858, there was a strong control of the British government on the hill areas of Himachal Pradesh and
they were established in the following manner System implemented-
♦ There were two types of governance in Himachal at that time. In Punjab Hill States, states of Nurpur,
Kangra, J aswan, Guler, Sibba, Dattarpur, Kotla, Kullu, Baghal, Lahaul and Spiti had lost their independence.
The British conquered these princely states and joined the British Empire. The area of these princely states
was organized and 'District Kangra' was created as an administrative unit. Its administration was under
the _control of Deputy Commissioner Kangra.
♦ In addition to the Shimla Hiil States, Jutogh, Spatu, Kasauli, Dagshai, Kotkhai, Bharoli, Sanawar and Shimla
city were separated from the different areas of the city, 'District Shimla' which was under the control
of Deputy Commissioner Shimla. Dalhousie and Bakloh Cantonment area of District Kangra district of
Shimla and Chamba states were directly under the control of the British.
♦ The small states under the rulers of the Shimla Hill States and the states of Sutlej used to come. Bushahr,
Keonthal, Jubbal, Kumarsain, Kuniyar, Baghal, Baghat, Balsan, Shangri, Kuthar, Beja, Bhajji, Darkoti,
Dhami, Mangal, Mah~log, Tharoch, Nalagarh, Khaneti, Delath, Theog, Ghund, Madhan, Ratesh and Ravi
like small thakuraiyo and they were the administration by the native rulers. Karangla, Khaneti, Bharoli,
Delath and Shangri were under the rule of Bushahr Thus, Rawin, Dhadi and Saari ruler of Jubbal was the
ruler. The rulers of Theog, Ghund, Madhan, Ratesh and Koti were subject to the Keonthal kingdom. ·
♦ These Thakuraiyos never had their own separate and independent existence. These Thakuraiya were in the
dominance of the administrators of large states like Bushahr, Si1111aur, Nalagarh, Keonthal, Bilaspur and
Jubbal. Although these princely states accepted the domination of the British, it was autonomous in their
internal rule. The British government appointed superint~ndent and commissioner, Shimla Hill States for
their control.
♦ Among the princely states of Sμtlej, Mandi, Suket, Bilaspur, Chamba and_ Kuttlahad were also ruled by native
kings. For the control of the British domination, the 'Superintendent of Cis-Sutlej States' was appointed.
The British officers appointed by the Punjab Government were in control of all these states. Officers of this
department-looked after the administration · of political residents, agents and superintending principals.
All these officers were liable to Viceroy.
♦ Under the Government of India Act, 1858, the rulers of all the princely states of Himachal were granted
autonomy in the internal governance of their states.
(xiii) Honourable kings who assisted during the uprising of 1857 AD : Apart from ignoring the rebeUion of King
Shamsher Singh of Bushahr, the rebellious king of J aswan, Ranasingh was freed from Almora jail and conferred
jagir in Jaswana. Devi Singh, son of Raja Jagat Singh of Dattarpur, was released from Almora jail. The annual
pension of Raja Veer Singh of Nurpur was doubled. Rana Krishna Singh of Baghal was conferred with the title
Hi.story of Himachal Pradesh 37
of 'Raja' and his brother Jai Singh was conferred 'Khillat'. Rana Sansarsen of Keonthal was conferred the title
of "King" and conferred "Khillat". Rana Govardhan Singh's half-sight of Dhami was fo rgiven. The rulers of
Mandi, Sirmaur, Kahlur, Jubbal and Chamba were also honored.
(xiv) Delhi Durbar: Delhi Durbar was organized during the tenure of Lord Lytton in Delhj court. In it King Sh yam
Singh of Chamba, Raja Vijaya Sen -of Mandi and Raja Hirachand of Bilaspur took part. In 1911 Delhi was
made the capital of India in place of Calcutta. On trus occasion Delhi Court was organised . In trus court, Amar
Prakash, the king of Sirmaur, Amar Ambar of Bilaspur, King Vijaya Sen of Keonthal, Brumsen Kjng of Suket,
King Bhuri Singh of Chamba, Raja Deep Singh of Baghat and King Bhagat Chand of Jubbal took part.
0 A4.5 QUESTION ANSWER
a _Which Indian state of Himachal Pradesh did not co-operate with the British rulers in the first freedom
struggle of 1857?-Rampur Bushahr [HAS (Main )-1998]
a Who was the king of Kahlur during the revolution of 1857? -Hirachand [Statistical Ass t. Exam-2009 )
"& Where did the revolution of 1857 AD begin in Himachal Pradesh? -Kasauli Military Camp
[HAS (Pre)-2003 ]
a Which patriotic leader of Kullu revolted against the British in 1857, after wruch he was hanged along with
ms adviser Veer Singh? -Pratap Singh [HAS (Main) -2010 held in 2012]
a Brum Singh was the subedar of Jutogh's Nasiri Military Troop. -leader of 1857 Rebel
"& Who supressed did the Revolution of 1857 in Shimla? -William deputy commissioner
"& In 1857, who was convicted of hanging in Ambala for behaving in a sedentary letter? -Ram Prasad Bairagi
"& Who was the Commander-in-Cruef of Srumla hill areas during the Revolution of 1857? -General Anson
"& Where Pratap Singh and Veer Singh were sentenced to death in the Kullu region for promoting revolt? -
Dharamshala
"& When did the title of "King" was given to the rulerof Keonthal by "Rana"? -In 1857 AD
· [HP Ass t. Engg. (Elect) Deputy Manager-2017]
a In the Himachal Pradesh., which camps were protected during the uprising of 1857? -Dagshai, Subathu
and Kasauli cantonment [HP Asst. Prof Mech. (T.E .)-2016]
0 A4.5 OBJECTIVE-QUESTIONS
l. Who led the Jutogh Revolution (1857 AD)?
[HP Lecturer Polytechnic (Physics)-2014]
(A) Ma}laraja Ranjit Singh
(B) Bhim Singh .
(C) Guru Gobind Singh •
(D) Sansar Chand
Ans. (B) Bhim Singh
2. The only hill ruler who did not give military
and financial support to the British government
during the revolution of 1857?
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2013]
(A) Ruler of Kahlur (B) Ru.let of Bushahr
(C) Ruler of Sirmaur ·(D) Ruler of Mandi
Ans. (B) Ruler of Bushahr
3. In the year, 1857 AD, Srumla' s Deputy
Commissioner wanted to take action against
Bushahr, but the chief commissioner stopped
him from doing trus because: [HP CDPO-2014]
(A) The ruler of Bushahr was not in a position· to
control his army.
(B) The ruler had asked for some time to organize
his kingdom.
(C) This step could cause impediment in the
construction of Indo-Tibet Road
(D) Bushahr was a member of the Shimla Hill
States Confederation.
Ans. (C) This step could cause impediment in the
construction of Inda-Tibet Road
4. Who was the ruler of Bushahr state during the
Great Revolution of 1857, who participated in the
revolution against the British? [HP Clerk-201 2]
(A) Raja Mohinder Pal
(B) Raja Umer Singh
(C) Raja Shamsher Singh
(D) Raja Ram Singh
Ans. (C) Raja Shamsher Singh .
5. In 1857, where was the martyrdom of Jananayak
Pratap Singh, who inspired the people to rise up
against the British? [Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2008]
(A) Dharamshala (B) Srumla
(C) jogindar Nagar (D) Sirmaur
Ans. (A) Dharamshala
6. Which country ruled the neutrality of 1857 in the
freedom· struggle? (Not of the English, nor with
the rebels) [HAS (Pre)-2004, 2006, 2007, 2009]
(A) Rampur Bushahr (B) Nurpur
(C) Kangra (D) Jaswan
Ans. (A) Rampur Bushahr
38 General Knowledge (Himachal Pradesh)
7. Which of the following princely head was with (C) Mr. Moorecraft (D) Mr. Williams
the B~itish in 1857? [HAS (Pre)-2009] I Ans.
(A) Raja Mohan Chand 10.
(B) Govardhan Singh
(C) Ram Singh
(D) Fateh Prakash
Ans. (C) Ram Singh
8. Which ruler of Kullu was given the title of "Rai"
during the revolution of 1857?
(A) Thakur Singh (B) Gulab Singh
(C) Amar Singh (0) Cyan Singh
Ans. (D) Cyan Singh
9. In 1848 AD, who suppress the rebellion the wajir
of Nurpur and tr , Ll ...,l"amod Chand and Jaswan
and Dattarpur h -.~? [HPAS (Pre) Exam-2018]
(A) Mr. Lawrence (B) Mr. Jackson
0 A4.6 NATIONAL MOVEMENT
Ans.
11.
Ans.
(A) Mr. Lawrence
Which two Thakuraiyo were made subject to
Jubbal princely state in 1896?
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2018]
(A) Rawingarh and Ratesh
(B) Rawingarh and Sangari
(C) Rawingarh and Khaneti
(D) Rawingarh and Dhadi
(D) Rawingarh and Dhadi
During the 1857 Military Revolt, which king of
Bushahr ruled unfavorably with the British?
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2018]
(A) Shamsher Singh (B) Mahendra Singh
(C) U gra Singh (D) Rudra Singh
(A) Shamsher Singh
National Movement with special reference to Praja Mandal Movements in Himachal Pradesh (1848-1948
[HPAS (Main) GS Paper-1, Unit-I, Sub Unit-III]
Q. 1. Who was Pahadi Gandhi? Discuss their contribution in the freedom struggle?
[4 Marks, Sample Paper GS Paper-1 HPAS (Main)]
Q. 2. What was the Pajota movement in 1942 AD in Sirmaur state?
[8 Marks, 120 Words) (HPAS (Main) GS Paper-2) (Dated=29 .11.2017)]
HINT : Please see section 13 of the Part (i) for this.
Q. 3. During the colonial pet:iod, explain the farmers' discontent in the hill states of Shimla.
(20 Marks, 400 Words) (HPAS (Main) GS Paper-1) (Dated=28.11.2017)]
HINT : Please see the part (i) of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 for this.
Q. 4. Comment on the 'Jhugga Satyagraha' of Bilaspur and Bushahr's 'Dumh Movement'.
[(HPAS (Main) GS Paper..:1) (8 Marks, 120 Words) (Dated=19.11.2018)]
HINT : Please see (1) and (14) of section (i) for this.
(i) Farmers Discontent and Mass Movement
(1) Bushahr State in Dumh : When any King used to do any such work or land tax, which people considered
to be unfair and unjust, would. have left the village to show their fury and protest and went-to the nearby
forest. It was called the Dumb Movement. Dumh agitators used to suffer from this, the power also got
disturbed by such agitation and made an immediate effort to fulfill the demands of the agitators. Dumh
movement was often organized and peaceful. After reconciliation, "the people would come back to their
homes and again they were engaged in farming and other activities. · ·
In Bushahr state, in 1859 AD, there was a Dumh movement. Its main center was the area of Rohru. There
were many reasons for this, but mainly it was against the rneasurement of land in 1854 AD. Tehsildar
Shyamlal, resident of Nurpur, arranged the land at that time and fixed cash levy. Earlier, in the form of land
yield, certain parts of the produce, food, ghee, oil, wool, sheep and goat etc. had to be given to the state in
the form of tax. This movement was also related to the then state system. In these years, the tradition of the
dynasty Waziris was abolished. The1 ,fore, the Puari Wazirs of Kinnaur also threw this movement. At th~t
ti.me there was lack of money for giving malguzari. The British government intervention was necessary
to end this Dumh movement. First to resolve this, Deputy Commissioner of Shimla William Hay and
superintendent of the states went to George Camac Barnes Bushahr and discussed with King Shamsher
Singh. There were three demands of agitating farmers. First, eliminate the leasing system of that time,
secondly, handing over power to the dynasty W, ,irs and third, to collect the rent from conventional way
through produce and commodities. Su1 ,,,rintenc.. .:!nt Barnes accepted the three demands, considering the
seriousness of the movement. Thus tk · rmer· of Bushahr succeeded in conforming his demands to the
King and the British Government m d thL movement ended.
History of Hlmachal Pradesh
(2) Movement in Theog and Beja : In 1898, the Beja people protested against Thakur and capturt"d th· two
soldiers of the princely state. Uday Chand, ruler of Beja, suppressed this movement with the h •Ip of h
British government. Some leaders 0f the agitators were arrested . In 1898, the farmer protc. ted again t the
disturbances in settlement in Theog-Thakurai and they refused to give up. The state government re lax d
the people with the help of the British Government.
(3) Land movement in Baghal: In 1897, in the time of Raja Dhyan Singh of Baghal state, during the period of
1897 AD to 1902 AD, people started the agitation against excessive landlord. Farmers raised their agi tation
against huge increase in land rent, lack of pasture and prohibition of killing wild animals, which de rayed
their crops. The Brahmins of the village of Barog made huge sacrifices in the village and they went to
the king too. On the intervention of the British government, the state government relaxed the people by
imposing the penalty, which ended the agitation.
The revolt spread in Baghal princely in 1905 AD. When King Vikram Singh sat on the throne in l 904, he
was minor at that time. Therefore, the state's management was in the hands of Mian Maan Singh. The
beginning of this movement started with the patchwork of the Raj family, but later all the Kanait people of
the area revolted against the King's representative, the ruler and his brother. People stopped paying extra.
Unrest spread in, the state. In the end, the English superintendent of the hill states of Shimla went to the
capital Arki of Baghal and intervened and calm the agitators by giving assurances of justice. Along with
that Mian Sher Singh was transferred from Kumarsain to a council member. He started the land settlement
and made other reforms to establish peace.
(4) Revolt in Dodra Kwar: In region, which took p lace along with Garhwal of Bushahr in 1906 D, revolted
in Dodra Kwar. This area was administered by Raja to Ran bahadur Singh, a resident of the village of
P-0wari of Kinnatir village. He revolted against the king and tried to subdue the Dodra-Kwar to subdue it.
He stopped depositing the state's income in the treasury of Bu hahr. The people there also rebelled against
the Bushahr state in support of him, because Ranbahadur was a nationalist of that time. In the end, he was
caught in Shimla by arresting the command of the English officer of Sh imla hill principals in 1906, and wa
taken captive. He accepted accepting back the government's income. When he was ill, he was released from
prison. He died in Shimla.
(5) Farmer movement in Kunihar and Movement against Begar : In 1920, the farmers protested again t the
atrocities of the administration of the Kunihar State. People raised voice against Rana. The state government
suppressed this movement with the help of the British and stopped those who provoked sent in jail. In
1921, Babu Kanshi Ram of Kunihar and Satyanand Stokes of Kotgarh raised their voice agains t la very in
hill states. Satyanand Stokes launched agitation in the hill states against begar system. In order to crea te
awareness among the people, he wrote several articles and held a conference at the place of place. In 1921,
Stokes also held a conference in Rampur, capital of Bushahr princely state. After this, the king of Bushahr,
Padam Singh (1914-1947) assured the resignation of the residency.
(6) Theog Movement : In the October of 1926, the public protested against the administration of Rana
Padmachand (1909) in Theog Thakurai in October 1926. Its leader was his brother Mian Khadak Singh. But
later this movement fell loosely and Kharak Singh settled in Khaneti Thakurai along with his family. In
1927, Mian Kharak Singh again started this movement with Khaneti. This time, Rana's son Karamchand
and Rajmata also supported the public in open form. In order to suppress this movement, Rana sought the
help of the British Government. So Deputy Commissioner Salisbury sent the police to Shim.la. The police
arrested Mian Kharak Singh and dispersed the people.
(7) Mass Movement in Suket
1
: King Ugrasen's (1836-1876) Wazir Narotam was very tyrannical. He punished
some Brahmin families. People opposed it and demanded to arrest him, but the king continued to keep
this task forward. The king's son Rudra Sen also opposed that wazir. Finally, the king removed him and
made Dhangul a wazir in his place. It also started collecting heavy penalties from upper class people. One
day Dhangul Wazir went on a visit to the hill region. On this, people caught hold of him and kept him in a
confinement place for twelve days. They left him only when the king ordered him to leave. Raja heard the
complaints of people by going to Garh Chabasi. Raja, after seeing the corrupt Dhangul wazir' s crimes, fined
him twenty thousand rupees and punished him fo~ nine months.
In 1878, Rudrasen sat on the throne. He made Dhangul a wazir. He has increased the land tax of farmers.
This caused dissatisfaction among the people. People demanded justice from the king, but the king did
not pay any attention to it. With this they became disappointed and they came to the movement. The
people of the dynasty also supported the people. The king fired these people from the state. When the
situation worsened, Jalandhar Commissioner Tremletrait Suket came. He investigated the whole situation.
. 40' General Knowledge (Himachal Pr.
Wazir Dhangul was removed and detained the activists of Karsog. People have adop ed th policy of noncooperation.
movement from the administration . After the re-examination, the king wac; remov d from h
throne in)879. Mian Shiv Singh, the leader of the movemen t, came back from Kangra. The demand for
agi~ators was r~d4ced in the levy.
Suk~t Movem,ent of 1924 : ·rn the year 1924 AD, during the time of King Lakshman Sen (1 I 9 J of u t.
more people vyere charged th~n required. Segar system was in great swing. The person who did not hire.
his property was ·seized. 'Laxman punishment law' was run by the name of th king. In 1924. when h
labour, re1,' md taxation limits ½ re exhausted, the general public caught the path of conflict It wa led
by 1\1ian R · Singh of BaJ1 edh (Sunder Nagar). The people enci rcled the cou rt uncle hi leadership.
In this move1 'nt people from many areas of Suket participated . Laxman Sen took the army fro PunJab
on September '0, 1924 to deal with the situa tion. The British came to Sundemagar with the Gor a and
Peshawari sol iers. Colonel Michin als·-:> brough t some sold iers from Dharam ala . Seeing h i a ·o
fragile, ~atna · .ngh asked the people to be calm. Ratna Singh and his asso iate w re arrec; ed a d sea er d
and scared people. 42 people got caught. They were kept in Jalandhar, Lyallpur, ultan, Rawalpindi etc.
prisons.
(8) . Nalagarh Mass Movement: King Ishwar Singh sat on the thron in June 1 77. Ghulam Qadir Khan wa
the Wazir in his time. As soon as he took over the rule of this ki ng, he made new tax on the peopl and
increased land taxation. Fury in people increased and they refused to levy. Pe pie sembled and took
out rallies. People started hindering employees' work. In the si tu ation of u re t and di turbances, the
.. British Government intervened. Superintendent of Hill Sta te from himla reached , 'ala arh wi police
_teams. Suppressed the mass movement and grabbed its leader and driv the crowd. P pie accepted e1
demands and the king finally removed the Wazir and reduced the lease .
. In 191_8, there was mass movement in the hill areas of Nalagarh again t the a land law a d for
· laws: Raja Jogindra Singh and his deputy Chaudhary Ramji Lal can.no suppr this movement. I
·. end, the British government sent its army and suppressed the movement. The active agita tors were put in
jail. After this people adopted a non-cooperation policy with the sta te government. Being constrained,
government removed the grievances of the people and changed the laws. Thus the peace arran°emen was
.. established there.
(9) The Farmer's Movement of the Chamba: During the time of Shyam Singh (1 3-1904), there was a public
peasant movement in Chamba princely state. In the administration of King Shyam Singh and his depu .
· Govirid Ram, a huge•increase was made in the land lease on the farmers. Apart from this, Begar was
increased. To get any work done without wages was called Begar system. Under this, one person from eYery
family used to work in the state for six months. They were not paid wages nor did they get food from the
princely state. The upper class people were exempted from this. Therefore, the people requested to reduce
the levy and stop.the employment, but its king did not care. Seeing this, farmers of-Bhattiyat region started
· .· a movement against it. 'fl1:e people of Balana village participated mainly in this. The people refused to levy
and did not let the lease renters enter the village. They also stopped paying salaries. The non-cooperation
movement· c~nfinued for several months. When the administration could not suppress it, then the British
Governrnei:it _inte~ened. The commissioner of Lahore's movement examined the investigation. The leader
of tf:ie movemf:nt, Balana village, Larja, Bassi and Bilu were arrested and punished. Manv protesters were
arrested. Thus movement: was strictly suppressed. .
· (10) Public Movement in Bilaspur: In 1930, a huge rebellion arose due to the settlement of land in Bilaspur.
There was a IJOSsibility of land settlement and other taxes due to settlement among the people. So people
opposed the settlement of the land. Firstly the people of Pargana Bahadurpur organized a protest against
the _settlement. They stopped giving free wood, milk, ghee, bread etc. to the employees of the settlement.
Employees started vigorously on this. The people of Bahadurpur got fed up and broke the accessories of
the Patwaris. Council Chairman P.L. Chandulal could not properly handle the situation arising out of the
huge tax revenue taxed by the state, and dissatisfaction among the people was spread. To deal with the
agitators, Edward Wakefield was sent to Bilaspur by some other soldiers on the Secretary of the Resident
James Fitz Patrick from Lahore. The police caught some agitators gathered at Bila.spur village in amhol
village on the occasion of the fair. Some agitators were detained in jails. Due to the police running the tick
( c' 1da) in this rebellion, this movement got the name 'Dandra' movement.
(11) Kisan Movement in Mandi: 111 1909, in the time f Raja Bhawani Sen 1903-1912), there was a peasant
movement in Mandi. Wazir of Kit , eevanand Padha, was a cor-upt, tyrannic , ;: d wicked administrator.
He scared the farmers and took all grain busi ·ess into tht: r hands. At the same time, he rontinued
History of Himachal Pradesh 41
to exploit farmers by exploiting them with various kinds of taxes. He also increased the employment
for the people. Corruption in the princely state also increased greatly. In such a situation, Sarkaghat of
Shobharam area came to Mandi near the king with a complaint of 20 men and accompanied by their
grievances. This time even the king did not pay any attention to them. For the third time, he came to the
king with 300 men. At this time some people started arresting for the movement. In the end, under the
leadership of Shobharam, the procession of nearly 20,000 farmers reached Mandi. The aggrieved farmers
seized tehsildar Hardev and other officials and locked them in jail and captured court and police station.
The administration of the princely became perplexed. Shobharam' s order started running everywhere.
Raja Bhavani Sen felt compelled to ask the British government for help. Deputy Commissioner of Kangra
District, Assistant Commissioner of Kullu reached Mandi with some soldiers. Commissioner H.S. Davis
from Jalandhar also reached Mandi on time. The king removed Wazir Jeevanand from his position on the
demand of the people. Mian Indra Singh was appointed as the wazir in his place and Rajendra Pal, the
'Tika' of Kutlahar, was appointed as the King's advisor. The open trade of grain was ordered by reducing
the taxes of the farmers. After this, the situation improved. ·
In the month of September 1909, the farmers of Dodavan in Mandi principality organized another mass
movement in the Balh region. The farmers there protested against the inconsistent laws regarding the land
forest of the state government and refused to accept government orders. The leader of this movement was
Sidtlha Kharada of Badsu village. This time Raja's mentor Tika Rajendra Pal visited the area. Some were
captured, but later released. After conducting the investigation, the culprits were caught and punished.
Their leader Siddha Kharada fled to Hamirpur but was later caught in the Mandi conspiracy controversy
and was sentenced to seven years.
(12) Land of Sirmaur Movement: In the year 1878 AD, Munshi Nandlal and Munshi Fateh Singh started a
settlement in Sirmaur in the era of Shamsher Prakash. This was the first settlement of the state. When
the settlement began in the area of Renuka, people tho1;1ght that the king would increase the taxation.
Therefore, Sangdah's nominee Achbu and Pritam Singh, along with the people, fought with the settlement
staff and prevented them from doing the work of the land. He also tried to capture the settlement tehsildar
Munshi Jeet Singh. So the settlement staff went back to Nahan and met the king. The king tried to convince
the landlords, but they did not believe. Finally, the king sent soldiers from Nahan to capture the rebels. In
addition. the King has already informed the superintendents of hill states in Shimla. After seeing the police,
protesters returned home and their leader Achbu and Pritam Singh got caught by Shimla Superintendent
and sent them to Nahan. The other rebels were also captured and punished. After this, the settlement work
started running properly.
In May 1929, the people of Ponta and Nahan organized a movement under the leadership of Pt. Rajendra
Dutt in protest against the arbitrary land settlement in Sirmaur. The people of Ponta sent advertisements
to King Amar Prakash and the British Government. The procession was taken out in Ponta. The state
government tried to suppress the agitation at the behest of the British government and after some time the
agitation ended.
(13) Pajota Kisan Movement : In the year 1942-43, people of Paj?ta, upper area of Sirmaur, launched a peasant
movement about their grievances. This time the Second World War was in full swing. There :was a famine in
Bengal. The lack of food was experiencing. Therefore, the state government banned farmers from sending
the grain outside the state where they got good value for selling. The farmers were also ordered that they
keep a little food with them and sell the remaining food to the government co-operative societies. In the
state, house, customs and marriage were impermissible tax. Employees started taking more employment
than people. Farmers gathered in the village of Taproli in Pajota on October, 1942 and formed "Pajota Kisan
Sabha" to deal with the situation. Its chief Lakshmi Singh village Kotla and secretary Vaidya Surat Singh
were elected. Apart from this, Mian Guiab Singh and Attar Singh of JaGlol, Mehar Singh of Pankufar,
Madan Singh of Dhamla, Jamal Singh of Vaghote, Kaliram Shavani of Neri etc .. After some time, Madan
Singh of Dhamla village was made the head of Lakshmi Singh Pradhan. The entire control and operation
of this movement was in the hands of Vaidya Surat Singh: He wrote to Raja Rajendra Prakash requesting
him to visit the area to know the problems of the people himself. The Sirmaur king was reliant on the
flattery of Rajendra Prakash. The employees did not let the King meet the people. Hence, in the operation
of the police officer, Raja sent the police village, Dhamla, Habban. He could not suppress the movement.
After t.his the entire Pajota area was subjected to military rule. For two months people continued to agitate
under 'Marshal Law'. At the same time a person named Kamna died due to the bullet. After two months
after the military rule and the firing, the army and police arrested the main persons of the agitators. Some
j
42 General Knowledge <H m
l fl d d took refuge in the state of Jubbal. Jubbal's King Bhakta Chand gave him gr at r spe The
peop e e an t d by sitting in a tribunal in Nahan. Vaidya Surat Singh, Mian Gulab ingh, Amar protesters were prosecu e .
Sin h, Madan Singh, Kaliram etc. were given a ten-year sentence. .
g t M t from 1818 to 1888 in Bilaspur (14) Jhugga movemen : ovemen ' ' there was a Jhugga. movemd 1e·n t· ag · mJ h.t RaJa
d th tr · ties of the king, the Brahmins of Gehdaw1 tarte 1vmg m ugga
Amarchand. In or er to oppose ea 00 ah • b t d d b lil tin
and kept suffering with the flag of the devoted deity on the Jhugga, and Br a~ ur;; h ea kin y h d t g
fire in the Jhuggas before the king could arrest them .. ~e p~blic broke up and in e en ' t e g a 0
make an administrative rebalance and eliminate administrative system.
(ii) Activities related to Freedom Movement in Himachal Pradesh. th f t
(1) The Establishment of the Indian National Congress : Indian National Congress has ~ en_ on e . irsd
place in the run agi·t ati· on for i· ndependence o f t h e country. The i·m a gm· a. tion of the orgaruzation a retirke
Scotlandian Allan Octavian Hume from the Indian Service, was of the view that the Congress sho~ld ta e
only the social problem, but when he placed his mind in front of G~:,vemor General L~rd Duffenn, the~
Dufferin As a suggestion, he gave his opinion that keeping the Indian nation-welfare m 1ght, keep thi
institution as an independent political entity. Its first session was concluded in Bom_bay, on 28 December,
1885, at the recent Gokuldas Tejpal Sanskrit College. Among the main representatives were_A_.O. _Hu~e
from Shimla. The conference was convened by Barrister Womesh Chandra Banerjee. Initially this mshtution
had no malice to the British power. At that time, its purpo e was to make Indians in the admini~tratio~ and
to make appointments on high posts. By this time, higher officials were employed by the Bntish officers.
Over time, its policies changed and it became a political entity of the country.
(2) Establishment of Ghadar Party : At that time, outside the country, foreign countries were also engaged
in the independence of the Indian nation. In 1911, Lala Hardayal escaped from India and went to San
Francisco, located in the US, France. In the year 1913, on his initiative, and in the memory of the 1857 mutiny,
the summer started a 'Ghadar' newspaper. In the same year, in the conference of representatives of various
Indian communities in"the United States, the organization of Indian Association was established and its
·chief leaders became Hardayal. It was soon changed its name to the Ghadar Party. There were branches in
many countries. In America this weekly newspaper "Ghadar" was used in many Indian languages.
In 1913, Mandi's Hardev Ram left the job of a teacher and reached Japan via the United States. From there
they went to Shanghai. There he met Dr. Mathura Singh, leader of the Ghadar Party. Leaving the goal of
attaining higher education, Hardev Ram joined the Ghadar Party. In 1914, with a lot of literature of Lala
Hardayal's Ghadar Party, Hardev returned to India after becoming a revolutionary and started preaching
the Ghadar Party. He did a lot of work in Mandi too.
(3) Mandi Conspiracy: The incident of conspiracy of 1914-15 happened to be affected by the Ghadar Party.
When some people of the Ghadar Party came back from the US and the heat started some work to make their
supporters in the people of Mandi and Suket's princely state. He encouraged people by reading 'Ghadar
echo' literature. Rani Khairgarhi of Mandi and Mian Jawahar Singh came under her influence. Rani helped
the people by giving them money. After the secret meetings in December 1914 and January 1915, it was
decided that the police officer and the deputy should be killed and the government. funds should be
robbed and the bridge made on the River Beas could be blown up. After this, the principals of Mandi and
Suket have to be empowered. Only one Nagachala robbery or they failed in all their motives. As a result
of this failure, Queen Khairagarhi was expelled from Mandi. The task of receiving the training of making
a bomb by sending a lady from the Ghadar Party to 'Bhai Hridayaram' was assigned to Punjab. Bhai
Hida Ram was caught in the clutches of the workers of this party and he was sentenced to life in Lahore
conspiracy case. Later ~s sen!ence was changed into life imprisonment. In this trap, Hardev managed to
flee and_ he fled to ~adnna~ m Garhwal. !fe changed his name to Swami Krishnananda and joined the
Congress p_arty ~d Jumped mto the non-VIolent movement of the Sinddh province in 1917. In the end, all
the revolutionaries were caught and prosecuted and given long-term imprisonment. The chief among them
wer~Ja~ahar Narayal, Mian Jaw~ar Singh, Bad.rinath, Siddha Kharada, Jwala Singh, Sharda Ram,
Dalip Smgh, L~ngur~. ~ater, ~dayarrun was sent to Andamans for the punishment of black water
(Saza-e-Kalaparu). After this Mandi revolutionary organization became weak.
In ~e beginning of 1916,_ the revol~tionaries of the Ghadar Party in Mandi, Suket and Una became active
agam. They planned to kill the English of~cers. This time Mandi's workers were caught. Five of them were
prosecuted and sentenced to fourteen to eighteen years. The distinction of the Krantik Dal of Un K tik
Rishikesh Lath was opened and he became· underground and after some time he reached Iran :n~~in;;
the Ghadar Party. • J
History of Himachal Pradesh
(4) The beginning of the Congress Movement : Mohan Das Karam Chand Gandhi returned to South India
from South Africa in 1915 and was born into the National Liberation Movement. Within Congress, the
influence of Gandhiji began to grow rapidly and he started becoming a legitimate leader of the national
movement. From the 1920's, the Congress movement caught up with it. This year, Chaudhary Sher Jung of
Nahan-Sirmaur got membership of the Congress and jumped into the mass movement. In the same period,
the second country devotee of Sirmaur Pt. Rajendra Dutt joined the Congress and started the independence
movement in Sirmaur. Lala Bashiramin Palampur, Kangra, Baba Kanshi Ram were prominent in DehraGopipur.
On the call of Gandhiji in 1920, people like Pancham Chandra Katoch, Sarv Mishra, Bashi Ram,
' Kripal Singh, Sidhu Ram, Thohli Ram etc. in Kangra also became Congress workers. In May 1921, the first
representative organization of the Congress was formed in Shimla. In this, the Chief of the Maulvi Ghulam
Muhammad Congress of Shimla Nagar was elected. In addition, Bhagirath Lal, Deputy Prime Minister,
Muhammad Omar Numani Minister, Dwarka Prasad Deputy Minister and Lala Ghunghar Mal cashier
(Khajanchi) were elected. Maulvi Abdul Gani, Chiranjilal Adti, Harishchandra, Gokul Chand, Pyare Lal,
Kedarnath Sood, Rana Hoshiar Singh, Ram Kishan Bajaj, Swami Ramanand, Mohan Lal Sood and lawyer
Harishchandra Sood Shirnla were appointed members of the Congress Committee's executive committee.
(5) Mahatma Gandhi's arrival to Shimla : On May 11, 1921, Gandhiji Shimla Padhare He was accompanied
by Maulaita Muhammad Ali, Shaukat Ali, Lala Lajpat Rai, Madan Mohan Malaviya, Lala Duni Chand
etc. On May 13, Gandhiji meets Viceroy Lord Reading. On the second day Gandhiji addressed the women
in the recent Arya Samaj of Lower Market Shirnla. On 15th May he addressed a group of more than fifteen
thousand people at Idgah. People from the hill areas around Shimla also came to see Gandhi. The arrival
of Gandhiji's Shimla visit attracted the attention of the people of this mountainous region to the national
ideology. After about 1923, Bhagmal Sohta, an engineer from village Dhar in the state of Jubbal, entered the
nationz:i_!,,movement. From 1922 to 1923, the Congress Movement took hold in Shimla. Among them were
Pt. Gendamal, Maulana Muhammad Noni, Abdul Gani, Ghulam Muhammad Naqvi, Thakur Bhagirath
Lal, Hakim Trilokinath, the leading person who participated.
(6) Samuel Evans Stokes and Baba Kanshi Ram : Some time ago, a person from the US, Samuel Evans Stokes,
started living in the upper part of Shimla hills in Kotgarh. Impressed by the ideas of Gandhiji, he started a
movement in all the hill states against the practice of forced labour. They adopted Hinduism and became
Satyananda Stokes. Due to their participation in non-cooperation movement, they were arrested. He was
released on 24 March 1923 from Kaithu Jail along with other people in Shimla. After being released from
prison by Satyananda Stokes, he continued his program of social reform and political awakening in hill states.
Workers outside Kangra were also influenced by the national movement. When he came back to his village,
he would go ahead with the Congress work and take part in the flames. One such conference was held
in Taal near Sujanpur in 1927, in which Baloch soldiers beat people badly. Thakur Hazara Singh, Baba
Kanshi Ram (Pahadi Gandhi), Gopal Singh and Chatur Singh were also involved in this attack. The
soldiers sn~tched their Gandhi hats from them too. Against this, Pahadi Gandhi Baba.Kanshi Ram took the
oath that unless India is free, she will wear black clothes. The contribution of Baba Kanshi Ram and Hazara
Singh in the Congress movement is very important.
Baba Kanshi Ram was given the title of 'Pahari Gandhi' in 1937 by Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru in Garhdiwala
Jansabha. They gave him the title of 'Pahari Bulbul' by Sarojini Naidu.
(7) Administrative Reforms : The Raja of Mandi formed Mandi Vidhan Sabha Parishad in Mandi in 1933, which
passed the Panchayati Raj Act. Mandi was the first state in Shimla hill states v, hich enacted Panchayati Raj
Act. Bilaspur, Bushahr and Sinnaur states also· started administrative reforms.
(8) Arrival of National Leaders : Lala Lajpatrai came to Mandi in 1906 AD. Annie Besant, leader of the
Theosophical Society, ·came to Shimla in 1916. Mahatma Gandhi, Maulana Mohammad Ali, Shaukat Ali,
Lala Lajpat Rai and Madan Mohan Malaviya migrated to Shimla for the first time in 192L Muslim League
leader Muhammad Ali Jinnah Viceroy came to Shimla to meet Lord Reading. Mahatma Gandhi came
to Shimla in 1921, 1931, (~ times) 1939, !945 and 1946. In 1945, Mahatma Gandhi stayed in Manorville
(residence of Princess Amrit Kaur) and in 1946 at Chadwick Summer Hill.
(9) Agitator. : Rishikesh Lath started the revolutionary movement in Una . in 1915. Famous Lecturer of
Hamirpur, Yash Pal, in 1918, in the independence·struggle. Yashpal was sentenced to life imprisonment in
1932. He was the Chief Commander of the Hindustan Socialist Republican Army. Major Mehr Das of Indian
National Anny was given the title 'Sardar-e-Jung', Captain Bakshi Pratap Singh 'Tamgha-e-Shatru Nash'
and Harl Singh of Sarkaghat 'Sher-e-Hind'. Two Gorkha brothers Durgamal and Dal Bahadur Thapa of
Dharainshala were hanged in Delhi: Running the Civil Disobedience Movement, Baba Lachman Das and
Satya Prakash "Baghi" were arrested in Una "in 1930.
44 General Knowledge (Himachal Prade h)
(10) Incidents of the 1920 : Non-cooperation movement began in Himachal in 1920. The first representat1 e
body of the Congress in _Shimla was formed in 1921. The rulers of the princely state formed 'Chamber of
Princes' (Narendra Manda)) in 1921. In December 1921 England's Prince 'Prince of Wales' opposed the
arrival of Shimla. Lala Lajpat Rai was locked in Dharamshala in 1922 from Lahore. In 1925, Viceroy Lord
Reading inaugurated "Central Council Chamber" (present assembly) in Shimla. In Shimla and Kangra in
the year 1928, the Simon Commission had a protest on the arrival of India.
(11) Reorganization of Congress in Shimla: 1929 AD, the Congress was reorganized in Shimla, resulting in
a large number of members. Maulvi Ghulam Muhammad, Muhammad Umar Nirnani, Dwarka Prasad,
Sundar Lal, Bhagirath Lal, Dr. Nand Lal Verma, Lala Gendamal, Dinanath Aandhi, Roop Lal Mehta,
Shaligram Gupta, Kanhaiya Lal, Mela Ram Sood, Karam Chand Sood, Harishchandra, Hoshiar Singh Rana,
Gokul Chand, Pyare Lal Meharchand, Chiranjee Lal, Ramkrishnan Bajaj, Swami Ramanand, Lal Ghunghar
Mal ·etc Members continued to take part in the work of Congress. Apart from these, Bhagmal Sohta of
Jubbal, Satyananda Stokes of Kotgarh, Pt. Padamdev of Bushahar, Surat Ram Prakash of Theog, Kanhaiya
Lal Butail of Palampur, Thakur Gauri Dutt of Koti, Babu Kanshi Ram of Kunihar, etc. The agi tators
of many hill states etc. are also in Shimla Nagar He continued to parti cipate ex tensively in the works of
Congress.
(12) Civil Disobj:!dience Movement: On February 27, 1930, Gandhi an nounced the launch of Civil Disobedience
Movement in the country. Shimla and Congress workers of Kangra participated in this movement. About
this, there were rallies and procession was withdrawn. Many Congress people were captured and ent to
jail. For this civil disobedience movement, people like Lala Gendamal, Dr. Nand Lal Verma, Lakshmi Devi,
Roop Lal Mehta, Sundar Das, Lakhan Pal, Satyawati Khosla, Dwarka Prasad, Nawal Kishore, Vasudev,
Dinanath Andhi were arrested in Shimla and they were arrested ~ntenced to strin gent imprisonment
From July 20, 1930, 494 Satyagrahis were arrested in Shimla and sent to Shimla, Ambala, Ludhiana, Multan,
Lahore, Montgomery and Amritsar prisons. In Kangra too, till October 1930, 700 Satyagrahis were arrested .
(13) Gandhi-Irwin Convention: In March 1931, Viceroy Lord Irwin called Gandhiji to Shimla to deal with the
Civil Disobedience Movement. He was also accompanied by Jawaharlal Nehru, Maulana Abdul Kalam
Azad, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Madan Mohan Malaviya, Dr. Ansari. He came to Shimla on May 5,
1931 to talk again. This time Gandhiji also gave a speech in the Ridge Maidan. To sign the Irwin-Gandhi
agreement, Gandhiji once again shimla at 25 August 1931. He was accompanied by Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru,
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and Sir Prabhashankar Pattani.
Second World War began ort September 3, 1939. During this period, Congress's huge political conference
continued to be held in Kangra and other"hill areas. For this purpose, about 60 Congress Committees have
been formed in Kangra region and Hamirpur area. Seeing the growing influence of Congress, the British
govertunent tried to suppress it. That's why the government made false claims against big leaders and
arrested them and implemented the Defense of India Act. Due to this suppression cycle, Baba Kanshi Ram,
Baisakhi Ram, Brahmananda etc. were arrested and kept in Dharamshala Jail. In the Shimla on October 22,
1939, active Congressmen were caught iri this act. Among them_ were Dr. Nandlal Verma, Dinanath Andhi,
Munshi Ahmad din, Hariram Sharma etc. Of these, Dr. Nand Lal Verma and Hari Ram Sharma were left
unconditionally and others were given 6 months sent~nce.
(14) Individual Satyagraha movement: On October 17, 1937, Gandhi started the personal Satyagraha movement.
In this Satyagraha in Shimla, Pt. Padamdev, Chief of Congress Shyam Lal -Khanna and Mahamantri
Shaligram Sharma were the main figures. The slogan of 'Satyagraha' in the mountainous region very
reverberation, 'Na Bhai Do', 'Na Pai Do', which was later changed to Pt. Padam Dev, in the slogan of 'Bhai
Do Na Pai Do'. He gave more public talk to Ganj. The police caught Padam Dev and sent him to Kaithu Jail.
After being punished for 18 months, he was kept in jail in Ludhiana ai:id in Gujarat jails. In November 1940
a committee was formed to conduct personal satyagraha in the Kangra region. Thakur Hazara Singh, Pt.
Parsa Ram and Brahmanand were chief in this committee. Lata Mangatram Khanna was chief of Kangra
Nagar. In other places, too many people took part in the rally and got the arrests. In April, 1941, the slogan
of 'Bhai Do Na Pai Do' became famous as a popular movement. On December 4, 1941, Gandhi stalled the
personal Satyagrahi movement. As a result, all the arrest leaders were released. Thus the movement ended.
(15) Dhami Bullet Scandal : Dhami Bullet Scandal was on July 16, 1939. On July 13, 1939, the meeting of
volunteers of Dhami Princely State \Vas held under the chairmanship of Bhagmal Sohta, leader of Shimla
Hill States Himalaya Riyasati Praja Manda!. In this meeting, the Dhami Prem Pracharini Sabha requested the
History of Himachal Pradesh 45
removal of the ban, which Rana of Dhami refused. On July 16, 1939, under the leadership of Bhagmal Sohta,
people left for Dhama. Bhagmal Sohta was arrested in Ghanahatti. Rana ordered the mob gathered near
Halog·Chowk and shot him, in w}:uch two persons were killed and many were injured. On the command
of Mahatma Gandhi, Nehru appointed Dunichand lawyer to investigate this incident.
(16) Quit India Movement: On 14th July, 1942, the Congress Working Committee passed 'Gandhiji's 'Quit
India' proposal in Wardha. On 8th August, 1942, it was decided to run 'Quit India Movement' at the Bombay
meeting of All India Congress Committee. Gandhiji was given the leadership of this movement. In the
Shirnla, Kangra and 'British and party-march and movement began in connection with the "Quit English
India"and 'Bhai Do Na Pai Do' are two slogan villages in mountainous areas. During this movement,
agitating arresters such as Bhagmal Sohta, Pt. Hariram, Chaudhary Diwan Chand, Shaligram Sharma,
Nand Lal Verma, Tufail Ahmad, Om Prakash Chopra, Sant Ram, Harichand were arrested in Shimla. He
was sentenced to a stringent imprisonment and sent to jail in Punjab. Rjakumari Amritkaur from Shimla
continued to run the 'Quit India Movement' and continued publishing his magazine "Harijan" on being
closed in the custody of Gandhi. Congress workers of Kangra also participated in Satyagrah in support of
Gandhiji. During the Quit India Movement, many people contributed to it. Among those who participated
in such movements were Mangat Ram Khanna, Hemraj Sood, Comrade Ramchandra, Paras Ram, Sarala
Sharma, Brahmanand and Pt. Amar Nath. In May, 1944, Mahatma Gandhi was released from prison. As a
result, "Quit India Movement" has slowed down. In September 1944, the arresting leaders were released in
"Quit india Movement" in Himachal. ·
(17) The Wavell Plan: On May 14, 1945, India Secretary M.L. Emery in London announced a plan for India's
political solution in the Parliament, which is called "Wavell Plan" in history. Accordingly, Viceroy Lord
Wavell invited Indian political parties to negotiate on 25June 1945 in Shimll The delegation of invited parties
to participate in this conference reached Shimla. Among them, · Congress! President Maulana Abul Kalam
Azad and Jawaharlal Nehru, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Rajendra Prasa'd, Chakravarti Rajgopalacharya,
Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Acharya Kripalani, Govind Vallabh Pant, Pattabhi Sitai:amayya, Shankar Rao
Deo, Jai Das Dau.lat Ram, Ravi Shankar Shukla, Sucheta Kripalani, Sarojini Naidu, Bhola Bhai Desai,
Asif Ali, Aruna Asif, Mirabehn etc. Congress leaders came to Shimla To give advice, Mahatma Gandhi
also came to Shimla and stayed at Summerhill, the residence of Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, in Manorville. On
June 25, 1945, 21 delegates took part in the conference at "Viceregal Lodge", Viceroy's residence. These 21
representatives included Muhammad Ali. Jinnah, the Chief Representative of the Muslim League. In this
conference the Congress expressed satisfaction over political problems, but expressed its dissatisfaction
over the communal view of the Muslim League. Although the conference continued for several days and
Viceroy also intervened with integrity, the conference got faded in front of the league's persistence. Finally,
on 14July, the conference ended with Viceroy's announcement.
(18) Formation of Interim Government: In May 1946, a cabinet-mission from Bartania came to India to talk
to Indian leaders. Meetings of Indian leaders, Viceroy Lord Wavell and Cabinet Mission were also held in
Shimla from May 5 to May 12, 1946. It did not get much success from the Muslim League's fanaticism, but
Viceroy Lord Wavell succeeded in creating interim government and later the leagues ~lso understood the
wisdom of joining the government and talked to Viceroy. So on September 2, 1946, the Congress formed an
interim government in India and on October 26, 1946 the Muslim League leaders juined the government.
0 A4.6 QUESTION-ANSWER
a. How did the attention of Mahatma <;;andhi and Jawaharlal Nehru get attracted towards Himachal Pradesh
in 1944? -Plans to create union by native estates [HAS-1994]
a. Who was elected as the President of the Himalayan Hill States Regional Council Conference in August /
September 1946?-Y.S. Parmar [HAS (Main)-2013 held in Oct 2014]
a. · Who was the Chairman of the Indian State Committee set up in 1927? - Sir Harcourt Butler
a. Which year was the Himalayan Hill States Regional Council headed by Y.S. Parmar, who played the main
role in the formation of a state of Himachal Pr~desh.?-1946.AD [HAS (Main)-1999, 2001]
a Himachal Pradesh's Dhami Bullet Scandal was done. -By Dalip Singh Rana (ruler)
a. When did the Dhami Bullet Scandal? -In 16 July, 1939
[PGT (History)-2000, Excise & Taxation Inspector (Pre) Exam-2008]
a. The headquarters of the Himalayan hill state provincial cou11-cil was located. -In Shimla .
. a. Himalayan hill state provincial council in 1948 arranged for "a short-term government" which was the first
president. -Shivanand Ramaula
46 General Knowledge (Himachal Ptadesh)
'Is. In which Indian state of Himachal Pradesh, did the Pajota movement against the decision of the people to
help the British in World War II by their ruler? -Sirmaur state . [HAS (Main)-2007]
'Is. During World War II, which country's state of Himachal Pradesh has been mercilessly suppressed by the
police for opposing the war effort of the Kisan Sabha? -Sirmaur state [HAS (Main)-2005]
'Is. Between 1939-45, which state people had formed an independent government (public's government)
opposing the war effort of the British? -Sirmaur state (Pajota) [HAS (Main)-2001] [HAS (Main)-1998]
'Is. Between 1914-15, why Mian Jawahar Singh of Mandi was sentenced to imprisonment by the ruler of the
princely state? -In order to establish the party of Ghadar in Mandi. [HAS (Main)-1999]
'Is. Why was the Pajota movement in Sirmaur in 1942?-In opposing the assistance of the King of English and
the collection of heavy taxes from the public JHAS (Main)-1999, HAS (Pre)-2003]
~ What was the purpose of 'Swadhin Kahlur Dal'? -The suppression of the independence movement was
the party of king built to maintain its independent existence (Bilaspur was called Kahlur) .
[Statistical Asst. (Pre) Exam-2009]
~ Who were Mian Chu-Chu?-Sirmaur's freedom fighter (Agitator) [Clark Exam-2008, PCT (English)-2000]
~ Active members of Mandi's Ghadar Party-Bhai Hridayaram
~ Dhami Bullet Scandal in 1939, . -Halog Kennedy Square.
~ The Shimla Branch of The Indian National Congress became in-1920.
~ In 1947, Rampur's merger movement in Himachal Pradesh and India was started by-Anulal
~ Raja Durga Singh, who was the head of the Conference of states which named 'Himachal Prades~' on
February 25 to 28, belonged to which princely statE:? -Baghat (Solan)
~ How many people were martyred in the Dhami Bullet Scandal (July 16, 1939)-Two people
F'
~ Who is considered the Political Master of Hill Leaders? -Chaudhary Sher Jung :J,-i•. . . .
~ On the instructions of Mahatma Gandhi, which officer was appointed by Nehru for Dhami Bullet Sc~?,
-Dunichand
~ In 1883-84 AD, during the time of Raja Amarchand, the people of Bilaspur named the name of the enigmaf:i~ 1_ · f .
movement of burning a fire around the body against the king and burning it with fire. -Jugga Move~ll~ ,. ,., :
~ Nagchala was a brave youth hanging in a fake case of dacoity. -Surjan Singh, Nidhan Singh, Ch~ga .
Ghatarani
~ In June 1914, Lala Hardayal founded the institution, -Ghadar party •
~ Which companion of Hardev' s was sentenced to hang in Lahore conspiracy? -Bhai Hridayaram . ,
~ Who was Swami Krishnananda? -Revolutionary of Mandi (Haidev), Companion of Pahati Gandhi Baba
Kanshi Ram, member of the Ghadar Party.
~ Who first asked for the establishment of a separate hill state in 1946?-Thakur Hazara Singh
. [PCT (English)-2000]
~ What is the name of Vaidya Surat Singh associated with Sirmaur's movement? -Pajota Movement (1942)
[HFS-2003]
~ Which major revolutionary of Himachal Pradesh was convicted of a prolonged imprisonment in 1914-15
for establishing the branch of the Ghadar Party in Mandi?-Mia Jawahar Singh [HAS (Main)-2007]
~ In 1927, in the political conference organized at the place named Talon Sujanpur Tehri, ~ho came forward
as a major fighter of the freedom struggle? -Baba Kanshi Ram [HAS (Main)-2006]
~ Which leftist Hindi novelist -had worked with the revolutionaries in Himachal Pradesh in his early days?
-Yashpal [HAS (Main)-2006]
~ Between 1914-15, who established the first branch of the Ghadar Party in Mandi? -Jawahar Singh and
Princess of Khairgarhi · [HAS (Main)-2001]
~ After the second Sikh War of 1946, where did the British expelled the rebel rulers of Kangra, Jaswan and
Dattarpur?-Almora [HAS (Main)-2001]
~ Which leader of Hi:rrtachal Pradesh was expelled from the state of Sirmaur iri suspicion of not being a
loyalist?-Y.S. Parmar [HAS (Main)-1998]
- ~ In 1946, who a~ked for the first demand for the construction of the hilly princely states? -Thakur Hazara
Singh, . [HAS (Pre)-2003]
~ Due to ~e support of the national movement, did the British defeat the Rana of Bhajji? -Rana Rudrapal
[HAS (Main)-2010 held in 2012]
History .of Himachal Pradesh 47
~ The Political Conference of the Congress Committees of 19~7 which gave prominence to leaders such as
Baba Kanshi Ram, where did they happen? -Taal (Hamirpur) [HAS (Main)-2009 held in 2011]
~ Which indigenous principality had initially refused to merge in India after independence in 1947?-Bilaspur
[ HPACF-2010]
"a. Which Saput of Nurpur had announced the independence of its state in 1848, which was arrested and sent
to Singapore? -Wazir Ram Singh Pathania [HP ACF-2010] [HAS (Main)-1998]
~ When did the 'Pajota Conference' held?-11 June, 1942,in Pajota of Sirmaur
~ When did Shimla leader Bhagrnal Sohta meet in the princely state of Dhami? -13 July, 1939
~ What is not related to the conspiracy of 1914-15 (Shobha Ram/ Mian Jawahar Singh/ Hardev / Mathra
Das)? -Shobha Ram [HP Asst. (Engg.) De-puty Manager-2017]
0 A4.6 OBJECTIVE QUESTION
1. Which leader of the Ghadar movement was
sentenced to death in Lahore conspiracy case,
which was later converted into life imprisonment?
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2018]
(A) Mathradas
[HP Designated Officer-2016]
(B) Hardev
(D) MianJawahar Singh
Ans.
2.
(C) Hridayaram
(C) Hridayaram
Who is the composer of the inspirational songKadam-
Kadam Badaye Jaa .... of the Azad Hind
Ans.
3.
Ans.
4.
Ans.
5.
Fauj? [HP Allied Seroices-2015) [HP Clerk-2016]
(A) Baba Kanshi Ram
(B) Lal c;:hand Prarthi
(C) Ram Singh Thakur
(D) Prof. Yashpal
(C) Ram Singh Thakur
Which Sood Traders of Garli founded 'Bal
Bharat Sabha' in Shimla, whose agenda was
revolutionary? [HP PCT (Chemistry)-2016]
(A) Prithvi Chand Sood
(B) Dinanath Andhi
(C) Hemchand Sood
(D) Kishori Lal Sood
(B) Dinanath Andhi
In which district of Himachal . Pradesh is the
freedom fighter Chaudhary Sher Jung, Matha
Ram, Deep Ram and the Sunhari Devi related?
[HP Workshop Superitendent (Polytechnic)-2015)
(A) Una (B) Kangra
(C) Sirmaur (D) Chamba
(C) Chamba .
Who took the oath of wearing black clothes till
independence?
[HP State Coop. bank Ltd.-2015)
(A) Baba Kanshi Ram (B) ·P. Gendamal
_(C) Padamdev (D) Bhagrnal Sohta
Ans. (A) Baba Kanshi Ram
6. Why did Dr. Yashwant Singh Parmar begin the
Suket Satyagraha in February 1948?
. [HP CDP0-2014)
(A) Suket's subjects were very restless as a result
of anti-people rule. ·
(B) Raja Lakshman Sen did not sign the merger
letter of the Indian Union.
(C) Suket community was agitating for
constitutional reforms.
(D) Suket' s ruler was provoking other kings to
keep away from the Union of India.
Ans. (B) Raja Lakshman Sen did not sign the merger
letter of the Indian Union.
7. What was the extension of the movement of 'Bhai
Do, Na Pai' did the movement'?
[HP Clerk-2013) [HP Clerk-2014)
(A) Indigenous
(B) Non-cooperation movement
(C) Quit India
(D) Civil Disobedience
Ans. (D) Civil Disobedience
8. Who ruled the conference in Solan, February
1948, on the issue of merger in Himachal Pradesh
of hill states? [Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2008)
(A) Raja Durga Singh
(B) Pt. Padamdev
(C) Dr. Yashwant Singh Parmar
(D) Virbhadra Singh
Ans. (A) Raja Durga Singh
9. Who led the famous Mandi conspiracy of 1914-
15? [HAS (Pre)-2014)
(A) Swami Krishnananda
(B) Pt. Gauri Prasad
(C) Shobharam
(D) Mian Jawahar Singh
Ans. (D) MianJawahar Singh ..
10. Who was the first President of the prov1s1onal
government (1948)?
(A) Surat Singh Vaidhya
(B) Y.S. Parmar
(C) Atmaram
(D) Shivanand Ramaul
Ans. (D) Shivanand Ramaul , .
11. Which of the following was not related to Pa1ota
Satyagraha'?
(A) Surat Singh Vaidhya
(B) Y.S. Parmar
(C) Atmaram
(D) Shivanand Ramaul
Ans. (B) Y.S. Parmar
48
12. The Mandi conspiracy in 1914-15 was influenced
by whom? [HP Clerk-2014]
(A) Pajota Agreement
(B) Bhattiyat Movement
(C) 'Bhai Do, Na· Pai' movement
(D) Ghadar party
Ans. (D) Ghadar party
13. What is the place in Himachal Pradesh where a
great revolutionary spent 40 days after suffering
the horrors of exile for forty years and left his
body only . after five hours of declaration of
India's independence? (Sardar Ajit Singh)
Ans.
14.
Ans.
15.
Ans.
16.
Ans.
(A) Dalhousie
(C) Chamba
(A) Dalhousie
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Pre)-2011]
(B) Dharamsala
(D) Shimla
Who did the operation of the Quit India
Movement from Shimla?
[HP LT TET-2014] [HAS (Pre)-2003]
(A) Somnath
(B) Chaudhary Sharnsher Singh
(C) Princess Arnrit Kaur
(D) Baba Kanshi Ram
(C) Princess Amrit Kaur
Who was the first president of 'Himalayan Hills
State Regional Council'?
[HP Naib Tehsildar (Main)-2013]
(A) Swami Pumananda
(B) Pt. Padamdev
(C) Shivanand Ramaul
(D) Bhaskarananda
(A) Swami Pumananda
Which of the following did not participate in the
Delhi court in 1911 AD?
(A) Bhagat Chand-Jubbal
(B) Bhuri Singh-Chamba
(C) Amar Prakash-Sirmaur
(D) Balvir Sen-Keonthal
(D) Balvir Sen-Keonthal
0 A4. 7 PRAJA MAN DAL MOVEMENTS
General Knowledge (Himachal Pradesh)
17. In 1946 AD, who first asked for the creation of
"hill state"?
(A) Y.S. Parmar
(B) Shivanand Ramaul
(C) Pt. Padamdev
(D) Thakur Hazara Singh
Ans. (D) Thakur Hazara Singh
18. Which of the following was related to INA?
Ans.
19.
Ans.
20.
Ans.
21.
[HP JOA-2017]
(A) Ramlal
(B) Dr. Y.S. Parmar
(C) Bakshi Pratap Singh
(D) Dalip Singh
(C) Bakshi Pratap Singh
Major Durgamal of Azad Hirid Fauj, which year
was executed on the Red Fort of Delhi?
(A) In 1934
(C) In 1940
(B) In1944
[Leet. College (Zoology)-2009]
(B) In 1944
(D) In 1950
The first responsible government in the state of
Theog was built on August 15, 1947. Who was the
first Prime M~·ster of it?
[Tehsil V:'elfa7:e Officer-2009._]
(A) J.B.L. Khachi (B) Hira Smgh Pal
(C) Suratram Prakash (D) Balak Ram
(C) Suratram Prakash
Why was a rebel government formed by the
Kisan SaJ:,ha in Sirmaur State in 1942?
[HAS (Pre)-2006]
(A) Due to the removal of the ruler of the state by
the British
(B) Reasons for the princely state's refusal to
reduce rent
(C) Reasons to assist the British in the war effort
by the ruler of the state
(D) Due to widespread corruption and immoral
conduct of the ruler
Ans. (C) Reasons to assist the British in the war effort
by the ruler of the state
[National Movement with special reference to Praja Manda! Movements in Himachal Pradesh (1848-
1948)] . [HPAS (Main) GS Paper-1, Unit-I, Sub Unit-III]
(i) All India State People Conference: At the end of the 19th ~entury and in the early 20th certtury, people of hill
states became aware of the rapid progress. There too, the movement started to begin to set up a responsible
government. The Congress also understood that it showed the way to the princely state. At the same time,
Congress had to get ~ompl:te independence. It also included native principals. These princely states were
only fragments of India, which could not be kept separate from India. On December 17, 1927, "All India States
Peoples Conferencf' was formed in Bombay. Its first session was also in 1927.
Ludh~a.n_a Confer~nce: On J5-16 February, 1939, the conference of '~11 India States People Conference" in
Ludhiana was chaired by Jawaharlal Nehru. Pt. Nehru emphasized the establishment of the Praja Manda! in
the princely states. He expressed the idea that the small princely states should be formed together so that the
· organization is powerful. In this session in Ludhiana, Pt. Padamdev and Bhagmal Sohta were from the hill
History of Himachal Pradesh 49
states of Shimla. Swami Purnanand from Mandi, Thakur Hitendra Singh from Sirmaur, Sadaram Chandel
from Bilaspur, Vidya Sagar, Vidyadhar, Ghulam Rasul and Prithvi Singh from Chamba participated.
Subsequently, these hill states started to grow rapidly.
(ii) The formation of the Praja Mandal in Sirmaur : Being influenced by the proposals of the All India States
Peoples Conference, formed the first public body institution of Himachal in Sirmaur. Its founder was Pt.
Rajendra Dutt. He established his office in Ponta instead of Nahan. Chaudhary Sher Jung, Master Chatar
Singh, Sh~li~ram_ Sharma, Kundan Lal, Ajaib Singh etc. took active part in this. The first conference of Punjab
and Pahan R1yash p~ople was held in Lud~iana on 12th October, 1930. In this, Sardar Bhagat Singh and two
oth~rs from Sirmaur s ponta represented Smnaur Principality. In the same period, Pandit Shivanand Ramaul
of Smnaur State started his agitational life by becoming a member of "Sirmauri Association" located in Delhi.
Within the principality of Rajendra Dutt, he continued to operate it. In the year 1934, some people in Sirmaur
kingdom established a Sirmaur Praja Mandal. In it, Dr. Devender Singh, Ramnath and Atma Ram became the
founding members.
In order to terrorize the people of Praja Mandal, the princely government prosecuted Dr. Devendra Singh, Hari
Chand Padha, Atmaram, Indra Narayan and their associates. They were falsely accused of killing the Maharaja
and throwing stones at his car. These days Yashwant Singh Parmar was the District and Sessions Judge of
Sirmour. He favored the people of Praja Mandal in his decision related to this case and proved the allegation
of murder of Maharaja on them false. This led to political differences with King Rajendra Prakash of Yashwant
Singh Parmar. For this reason, p.e resigned from the job in 1941. At this the king expelled them from the princely
state. He organized the Sirmauri's in Delhi from 1943 to 1946 and prepared them to fight for the attainment of
democratic rights.
(iii) Baghal, Theo and Jubbal Praja Mandal: On 11 August 1938, some people from Baghal, who worked in Shimla,
held a meeting under the chairmanship of Jeevan Ram Chauhan and established the Baghal Praja Mandal.
Mansha Ram Chauhan was made the minister of this Praja Mandal. Its purpose was to create awareness among
the people about their rights. With this sentiment, Pt. Bhaskaranand formed the Praja Mandals in Bhajji, Surat
Rama Prakash in Theog and Bhagmal Sohta in Jubbal. The work of formation of similar Praja Mandals started
in the princely state of Kati, Kumarsain and Bushahr.
(iv) Bushahr Praja Mandal: In order to reactivate the Bushahr Praja Manda! in 1945, other organizations of Bushahr
like-Bushahar Reform Conference, Bushahr Prem Sabha and Sevak Mandal Delhi also organized the people of
Bushahr. Pt. Padamdev worked for this in Shimla and was done by Pt. Ghanshyam and Satyadev Busheri and
other leaders within the princely state. In later years_Negi Thakursain also started actively participating in Praja
Mandal. Along with this, the Praja Mandals of Bilaspur, Jubbal and other areas also stepped up their activities.
In this, Bhagrnal Sohta of Jubbal and Daulat Ram Sankhyan of Bilaspur participated enthμsiastically.
(v) Chamba Sevak Sangh : In the year 1936, some people in Chamba state formed an institution named "Chamba
Sevak Sangh". Later this institution turned into a political organization. So the government banned this
association. As a result, the Union made its center of activities, Dalhousie.
On the other hand, the Praja Manda! of Chamba princely state demanded that a popular government should
be formed in the pril:tcely state. Praja Manda! activists also voiced against feminism. He said that the Diwan
of the princely state took all the rights into his own hands. As a result, many individuals were captured when
the movement gained momentum. Gandhiji asked non-violence to launch a movement. The newspaper "The
Tribune" wrote in the editorial, "Awakening has also taken place in the sleeping Chamba. Democratic views
have crossed the hill barrier and reached the people of the princely state and they are asking for a responsible
government. " ,
(vi) Mandi Praja Mandal : Hindi and Urdu newspapers were writing articles about the bad condition of Chamba.
The Mandal was established in the 'year 1936. After Sirmaur it was the second praja Mandal in the hill states.
Swami Pumanand became its president. With them were Ram Chand Malhotra, Baldev Ram, Harsukh
Rai, Sunderlal and Moti Ram were prominent. Later, Krishna Chandra, Tej Singh Nidhak, Keshav Chandra,
Padmanath and Hem Raj -also became members of the people. Mandi's ~ng imposed restrictions on the
activities of the people. ·
(vi) Dhami Prem Pracharini Sabha : Many people here ~sed to work in Shimla because they were near the Shimla
of the Dhami estate. In 1937, he made a 'Prem Pracharini Sabha' with the aim of improving his principality.
Baba Narayan Das, who was employed in Shimla, was its president and Pt. Sita Ram was made a minister.
Initially, its purpose was social and economic reform, but later it was also taking part in political work and
talking about the movement.
50 General Knowledge (Himachal Pradesh)
(vii) Dhami Praja Mandal : Meanwhile, the "Prem Pracharini Sabha" of the Dhami princely state planned to join
the princely Praja Manda! Shim la to avoid government repression. For this purpose, on 13 July 1939, under the
chairmanship of Bhagmal Sohta, a meeting of the Praja Mandals of the hill states of Shimla was held at Ca mli
loca tion near Kasumpti near Shimla. In this meeting the "Prem Pracharini Sabha" of Dhami princely state was
changed to "Dhami Praja Manda]". Pt. Sita Ram of Dhami was appointed the head of this organization. On this
occasion, a resolution was passed by the Dhami Praja Manda], in which the following demands were made
from Rana Dhami :
1. The Begar system should be abolished.
2. Fifty percent reduction in land rent will be reduced.
3. Dhami State Councils should be recognized.
4. People should be given the freedom of civil rights.
5. The restrictions and barriers imposed on the people of the state should be removed.
6. The confiscated property of the members of the Prem Pracharini Sabha Dhami will be returned.
7. A representative responsible government should be constituted in Dhami and the representatives of the
public should be appointed in administrative work. ·
It was expressed in the proposal that if a reply from the ruler ofthe state did not get any response soon, then
on July 16, a delegation ·of seven persons would come from Halog and meet Rana. Manasa Ram was made a
special representative and the demand letter was sent to Rana Dhami. Rana considers this letter to be an insult.
He did not accept the demands of the people and did not respond to the proposal. On no reply, it was decided
that on July 16, Bhagmal Sohta will depart from Shimla for Dhami and people will be attending their welcome
at the playground, about one and a half miles away from the capital city of Halog, on July 16. On the other
hand, the remaining six representatives Hira Singh Pal, Mansa Ram Chauhan, Pt. Sita Ram, Babu Narayan Das,
Bhagat Ram and Gauri Singh will meet with him. From there, he will go to Rana Dalip Singh.
Dhami Bullet Scandal: Bhagmal Sohta on July 16, at approximately eleven o'clock went to Shimla for .a small
party and went to Dhami. Two members of this group, Bhagat Ram and Devi Saran had lifted the Congress
flag. When Bhagmal Sohta and his companions reached near Ghanahatti near the border of Dhami, the princes
of the princes took custody of satyagraha leader Bhagmal Sohta and took them to Dharma. The people gathered
for the welcome of the Satyagrahis came up to Rana's residence, sloganeering against Rana. Rana got frightened
and ordered to shoot the mob to disperse the crowd. This caused a stir there and many people were badly
injured. Two persons died. Bhagmal Sohta, leader of Satyagraha, was arrested and sent to Ambala.
(ix) Kunihar Praja Mandal: Leader of the Hill States Praja Mandal went to Kunihar state on July 8, 1939. There he
along with Kanshi Ram made many people members of the people's movement. On July 9, 1939, in the chair
of Rana Hardev Singh of Kunihar, in the Darbar Bhawan of Kuniyar, a law was established in the name of
"Kunihar Prajamadal". Babu Kanshi Ram was appointed the guardian of the praja Mandal Kunihar. Bhagmal
Sohta and Dev Suman were also present in this meeting. Apart from this, representatives from the princely
state of Dhami, Baghal, Patiala, Mahalog were also attending the meeting.
(x) The establishment of Shimla Hill State Riyasati Praja Mandal (Himalaya Riyasati Praja Mandal) : On June 1,
1939 in Shimla, was held a representative of the people of Shimla hill states. In.this, secret activities of the kings
and the Rana were brought to light. Influenced by the Ludhiana conference, different institutions of the hill
states of Shimla formeg a joint body, named "Shimla Hill State Riyasati-Praja Mandal". In the establishment
of this institution, Pt. Padamdev of Bausher and Bhagmal Sohta of Jubbal made special contributions. In this,
Pt. Padamdev is Minister and Bhagmal Sohta were made Mahamantri. In June 1939, Pt. Padamdev went
from Shimla to Hyderabad with the Arya Samaj group and Bhagmal Sohta took the task of propagating and
spreading the Praja Manda! in the hill states of Shimla .. In July 1939, a campaign for establishment of a praja
mandal organization was started in Shimla' s hill states. ln the beginning of this month, Bhagmal Sohta, Hira
Singh Pal, Dev Suman established "Praja Mandal Mahalog'' in the princely state.
(xi) Himachal Hill State Council: At the end of 1945, "All India States People's Conference" was held in Udaipur.
After the convention, the :r:epresentatives of Praja Mandal, who went from the hill states at the same place,
established an institution called "Himachal Hill States Regional Council" in January 1946 to run the Praja
Mandal smoothly in their area. Its head Swami Purnanand was created and his office was kept as Mandi. Pt.
Padamdev was made its Chief Secretary and his office was kept in Shimla. Apart from this, Shyam Chand Negi
was appointe,d as Deputy Chief and Shivanand Ramaul as Joint Secretary. First conference of "Himalayan Hill
States Regional Council" from 8 to 10 March 1946 in Mandi. In addition to council chief Swami Pumanand,
Mahantri Padamdev and joint secretary Shivanand Ramaul, representatives of the hill states of Suket, Mandi,
Bilaspur, Sirmaur, Chamba, Nalagarh, Baghat and Shimla were actively participated. Col. Gurdial Singh
,.
History of Himachal Pradesh 51
Dhillon, <!, well-known fighter of the Azad Hind Fauj, also reached Mandi to preside over the conference.
The ~imalayan States Regional Coundl was held in Nahan-Sirma;ir on 31st August and 1st September 1946.
In ~is conference, ~ore than forty representatives from the hill states along with Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya,
President of All India States People's Conference and J aynarayan Beas Mahamantri Carnal Shahnawaz Duni
Chand Am~alvi etc. were present. This conference organized by Rajendra Dutt', Shivanand Rama~l, Dr.
Devendr~ Smgh, Hitendra Singh, Dharma Narayan, Harichandra Padha and his colleague agitators of Prajna
Manda! Smnaur _created an unprecedented awakening in the Sirmaur state, due to which the princely state
was shaken. In this period, Chiranji Lal returned to Shangri and started the movement against the labour. This
year, Cyan Chillld Tutu became the head of the Kohistan Praja Manda!. In November 1946, Satyadev Bushahri
bec~e the head of. the Bushahr Praja Mandal. During this period, Bhagmal Sohta gave special speed to the
Pra1a Manda~ ~ovem~nt ~ the princely state of Jubbal. Jai Lal Sharkholi, Master Ram Ra tan, Mian Kahan Singh
etc. also partiapated m this movement. In the Balsan principality, this movement took a radical look.
In Feb~ary, 1947, Leela Das Verma of Bhajji, Kanshi Ram Upadhyaya of Bilaspur and some other workers of
~-e Pra1a Man~al wen~ to 1?elhi with Dr. Yashwant Singh and brought them to Shirnla. Dr. Yashwant Singh
JOmed the National Liberties Movement at the request of Pt. Padamdev, Shivanand Ramaul, Daulat Ram
S~yan, P~. Sita ~am'. Durga ~ingh Rathod and other hill leaders in Shimla. He started living at the Krishna
~illa ~od~e ~ San1auh near Shun]a. At the same time, Leela Das Verma opened the office of the People's Party
m SanJauli. Srmultaneously✓ Dr. -Yashw..._il!lt Singh Parmar, who started permanently in politics, started leading
the movement in hill states. --.. . · ·
The first meeting of the Himalayan Hill States Regional Council was held in Shim.Ia on March 1, 1947. In this
meeting, the council officials were elected. Dr. Yashwant Singh Parmar was elected its Chief and Pt. Padamdev
was elected its Mahmantri. In April 1947, Dr Parmar went to Delhi to participate in the Gwalior session of
Congress with Daulat Ram Sankhyan, Narottam Shastri, Leela Das Verma, Shivanand Ramaul etc.
(xii) Himalayan Hill States All Regional Council: On June 10, 1947, another meeting of Himalayan Hill States
Regional Council took place at Shimla's Royai Hotel. In it 11 members from 16 members participated in
the meeting. In this meeting the differences arose among the members and six members formed a separate
organization. The name of this organization was named "Himalayan Hill States Sub-Regional Council" Dr.
Yashwant Singh Parmar, the head of this new council, was elected. Tej Singh Nidhak of Mandi, Leela Das
Verma of Bhajji and Sadaram Chandel of Bilaspur were made Vice-Principal. Pt. Padamdev Mahamantri,
Daulat Ram Gupta Promotions Minister, Surat Ram Prakash Treasurer and Senu Ram were given the charge
of the Office of the Minister. In addition, Shivanand Ramaul, Sadhuram, Nar Singh Dutt, Hira Singh Pal,
Gauri Nand, Devi Ram, Chaman Lal· and Chiranji Lal Verma were included in the Council's executive. The
Himalayan Hill States Sub-Regional Council organized the first conference on July 31, 1947 in the hill state of
Shimla in Sangari, which included Dr. Yashwant Singh Parmar, Pt. Padamdev, Satyadev Bushahri, Surat Ram
Prakash, Thakur Haridas, Radha Krishna etc. The conference was organized by Chiranji Lal Verma, a working
committee member of the people. Seeing the success of the conference, the king of .Sangri left Sangri and moved
to Kullu situated Aani along with his family.
In August 1947~ the Sirmaur Praja Manda! organized a big conference in Nahan. Its main organizers were Pandit
Rajendra Dutt, Dr. Devender Singh, Dharm Narayan Advocate, Pt. Shivanand Ramaul. Rajendra Prakash of
Sirrnaur participated in this conference. Dr. Yashwant Singh Parmar, President of Himalayan Hill States SubRegional
Council was made the President in the conference and he waved the national flag. From Novembe_r
1947, Dr. Yashwant Singh and Pt. Padamdev started tour of Suket State. On behalf of the principality in Mandi,
many of the people were being arrested and many activists were arrested for participating in the people's
Mandals.The state government of Suket also started suppressing the agitators. Ratna Singh, the leader of the
Praja Manda!, and some of his companions, fled to Shimla and the people from here went to Delhi. ~ere they
meet Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. Dr. Yashwant Singh Parmar, the head of Himalayan
Hill States Sub-Regio~al Council, was also with him. Central leaders assured the ass~sta~ce. Dr. Yashwant i
Singh, President of Himalayan Hill States Sub-Regional Council Group, continued to ca~pa1gn on il:e merger i
· of Parmar hill states in the "Union of Indi2". On the other hand, members of the 'Himalayan HIii States
Regional Council', the original organizati<.. 11, continued their work reS:11arly. Its main rnem~ers, Bha~al
Sohta, Satyadev Bushahri, Hira Singh Pal, Bhaskarananda Sharma, Swann Pumanand, Babu Shiv_ D~t~, Pt.Sita
Ram, Thakur Hari Das, Surat Ram Prakash, Devi Ram, Sanat Ram, Mukund L~I, Sada Ram, Negi V1:Ja Nand,
Chiranji Lal Verma. These people organized this group on December 21, 1947 m Badag~on, ~e capital of ~e
princely state of Shangri. It is headed by Satyadev Bushahri. A resolutio~ was passed _in this_ conference, '.n
which all the hill states were demanded to make a hill state. These people mcreased the1r pr ~ure on the hill
52 General Knowledge (Himachal Pradesh)
kings and demanded that they make a responsible government in their states. After attaining independence on
15th August, 1947, due to sympathy with the people of_ the State Man~al of the G?vei:nme~t of India, the kings
also began to establish responsible governments ~n their stat~s by se~mg the fragile si~a_t10n. .
(xi i i) Representative Governments : Thakur of Kumhar appre_ciated this movement an? JOmed the people of h1s
state in the administration. Seeing this, some other rulers did the same. On the occasion of Independence Day,
Leader of the Legislative Assembly of the Theog states forced Rana Karamchand to quit power. After some
time, Rana announced the Council of Ministers, which had 13 members. Mahatma Gandhi and Sardar Patel
welcomed these steps, but after five months Rana captured the treasure with the help of some people. Armed
police custody was sent to Sardar Patel's intervention. The ruler was captured and thrown out of there. Theog
was the first princely state, which was found jn the Indian Union before Himachal Pradesh was formed.
Jubbal king Digvijay Chandra made a committee of eight members in view of the time of the coming. It had
five members elecfed and three nominated. Its task was to hear and remove people's complaints. Later, a
representative government was formed, whose Chief Minister Bhagmal Sohta and Jailal Sharkholi, Washir
Chand Negi, Babu Dula Ram Bhejta and Kunwar Raghuvar Singh became Mantri. The ministry continued
working on April 15, 1948. Rana of the Koti announced the establishment of an assembly on November 25,
1947. In Bushahr, Satya Dev Bushahri started the Satyagraha movement in March 1947. For this reason many
workers were caught. Seeing this, the state's employees started the agitation and made the "Employees Union"•
The state government c1.ccepted their demand and accepted the offer of a representative meeting on April 18,
1947. Representatives of the people were not taken into confidence to establish this House of Representatives.
So he passed the non-confidence motion. Elections were held in October 1947 and the People's Party won the
election under the leadership of Satyadev Bushahri.
After attaining independence, some people demanded that the hill kingdoms be merged with East Punjab.
Eastern Punjab Governor Chandu Lal Trivedi and Chief Minister Gopi Chand Bhargava also wrote a letter to
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Sardar Patel that the hill states should be merged with East Punjab but the rulers
and the people of these princely states stubbornly opposed it. The people of these kings and the people said that
the people of these princely states are very different from the people of Punjab in terms of language, culture and
social behavior. The same thing was written in response to the letters of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Sardar
Vallabhbhai Patel, the Governor of Punjab, Chandu Lal Trivedi and Gopichand Bhargava. Therefore, the King
of the hill states of Shimla gathered in Delhi in the first week of January, 1948 and made a further program.
In the meeting, these kings passed· this resolution: "After taking complete consideration, It has been decided
that in keeping with the spirit of the people and goodness, all the hill states ofShimla should be organized as a
union." '. Therefore, messages were sent to all the-states that they would choose their respective representatives
and send Solan on January 26, 1948 so that they can participate in the meeting of the committee that constitutes
the constitution. During this period, King Durga Singh of Baghat and King Joginder Sen of Mandi were in
Delhi. Both of them met Mahatma Gandhi there. Gandhiji advised them to convene a meeting of the people and
the representatives of the kings and make a decision about their future.
0 A4.7 QUESTION-ANSWER
B When was the establishment of the Sirmaur Riyasat Praja Mandal?-1934 AD [PCT (English)-2000]
B Who established the Dhami Riyasati (Praja) Mandal in July 1939? -Bhagmal Sohta
. [HAS (Main)-2016 held in Feb. 2017]
B In July 1939, the leader of the Kisan Parishad headed towards Dhami, in which the bullet finally killed two
people. -Dhami (Bhagmal Sohta) [HP SAS (Main)~2015 held in 2016]
B Who had the presidency of the People's Conference held in Mandi city of Mandi, India, from March 8 to 10,
1946? - Swami Pumanand , [HP SAS (Main)-2015 held in 2016]
B Which nationalist leader formed the Praja Manda! Committee in Pachhad tehsil of Sirmau:r district in 1938
after his release from Multan jail?_-Chaudhary Sher Jung [HAS (Main)-2015 held in Sept. 2016]
B Who led the Praja M;mdal Satyagraha of March, 1947 in the Bushahr state?-Satyadev Bushahri
. [HAS (Main)-2014 held in Sept. 2015]
B Which of the following (Pandit Padamdev / Gyan Chand Tutu/ Bhaskar Nand Sharma/ Virbhadra Singh)
is not the leader of the p~ople? - Virbhadra Singh [HP School Letc. I.P,-2012}
B Inspired by the Session of the All India Riyati Janta, the Himalayan Riyasati Prajana Mandal of hill state was
established in Shimla? - Ludhiana session
B Relation of Prem Pracharini Sabha -Dhami Estate
* Active members of Sirmaur Peoples Division -Sherjung, Shivanand Ramaul, Y.S. Parmar
* Founded in 1939, Himalaya was the President of the Riyasati Praja Manda!. -Padam Dev
* Who chaired the Mandi Conference of Praja Mandals held from 8 to 10 March 1946?-G.S. Dhillon
* When did Prem Pracharini Sabha Dhami transformed itself into the Dhami Riyasati Praja Mandal? -1939 [HP Range Forest Officer-2017]
* Which of the following was not associated with the people's movement of the Sirmaur kingdom? (Pt. Sita Ram/ Chaudhary Sher Jung/ Dr. Devendra Singh/ Shivanand Ramaul) - Pt. Sita Ram [HP Research Officer-2017]
* Which year was the establishment of the Bilaspur Peoples Association? -1945-46 AD [HP Agriculture Development Officer-2016]
* Who organized the Dhami Riyasati Praja Manda!? -Pt. Sitaram [HP Scientific Officer (DNA)-2016]

### 1.4 Previous Year Questions
#### 1.4.1 Prelims
#### 1.4.2 Mains
Q1. Describe the relationship between Sikhs and Hill states in the nineteenth century. [HPAS (Main) GS Paper 1, (8 Marks, 120 Words) (19-11-2018)]